Common sense is a basic ability to perceive, understand, and judge things, which is shared by ("common to") nearly all people and can reasonably be expected of nearly all people without any need for debate.
The everyday understanding of common sense is derived from philosophical discussion involving several European languages.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Related terms in other languages include Latin sensus communis, Greek   (koin asthsis), and French bon sens, but these are not straightforward translations in all contexts.
Similarly in English, there are different shades of meaning, implying more or less education and wisdom: "good sense" is sometimes seen as equivalent to "common sense", and sometimes not.
"Common sense" has at least two specifically philosophical meanings.
One is a capability of the animal soul (Greek psukh) proposed by Aristotle, which enables different individual senses to collectively perceive the characteristics of physical things such as movement and size, which all physical things have in different combinations, allowing people and other animals to distinguish and identify physical things.
=======
Related terms in other languages include Latin sensus communis, Greek κοινὴ αἲσθησις (koinē aísthēsis), and French bon sens, but these are not straightforward translations in all contexts.
Similarly in English, there are different shades of meaning, implying more or less education and wisdom: "good sense" is sometimes seen as equivalent to "common sense", and sometimes not.
"Common sense" has at least two specifically philosophical meanings.
One is a capability of the animal soul (Greek psukhē) proposed by Aristotle, which enables different individual senses to collectively perceive the characteristics of physical things such as movement and size, which all physical things have in different combinations, allowing people and other animals to distinguish and identify physical things.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
This common sense is distinct from basic sensory perception and from human rational thinking, but cooperates with both.
The second special use of the term is Roman-influenced and is used for the natural human sensitivity for other humans and the community.
Just like the everyday meaning, both of these refer to a type of basic awareness and ability to judge which most people are expected to share naturally, even if they can not explain why.
All these meanings of "common sense", including the everyday one, are inter-connected in a complex history and have evolved during important political and philosophical debates in modern western civilisation, notably concerning science, politics and economics.
The interplay between the meanings has come to be particularly notable in English, as opposed to other western European languages, and the English term has become international.
In modern times the term "common sense" has frequently been used for rhetorical effect, sometimes pejorative, and sometimes appealed to positively, as an authority.
It can be negatively equated to vulgar prejudice and superstition, or on the contrary it is often positively contrasted to them as a standard for good taste and as the source of the most basic axioms needed for science and logic.
This began with Descartes' criticism of it, and what came to be known as the dispute between "rationalism" and "empiricism". In the opening line of one his most famous books, Discourse on Method, Descartes established the most common modern meaning, and its controversies, when he stated that everyone has a similar and sufficient amount of common sense (bon sens), but it is rarely used well.
Therefore, a skeptical logical method described by Descartes needs to be followed and common sense should not be overly relied upon.
In the ensuing 18th century Enlightenment, common sense came to be seen more positively as the basis for modern thinking.
<<<<<<< HEAD
It was contrasted to metaphysics, which was, like Cartesianism, associated with the ancien rgime.
=======
It was contrasted to metaphysics, which was, like Cartesianism, associated with the ancien régime.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Thomas Paine's polemical pamphlet Common Sense (1776) has been described as the most influential political pamphlet of the 18th century, affecting both the American and French revolutions.
Today, the concept of common sense, and how it should best be used, remains linked to many of the most perennial topics in epistemology and ethics, with special focus often directed at the philosophy of the modern social sciences.