Functional magnetic resonance imaging or functional MRI (fMRI) is a functional neuroimaging procedure using MRI technology that measures brain activity by detecting changes associated with blood flow.
This technique relies on the fact that cerebral blood flow and neuronal activation are coupled.
When an area of the brain is in use, blood flow to that region also increases.
The primary form of fMRI uses the blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) contrast, discovered by Seiji Ogawa.
This is a type of specialized brain and body scan used to map neural activity in the brain or spinal cord of humans or other animals by imaging the change in blood flow (hemodynamic response) related to energy use by brain cells.
Since the early 1990s, fMRI has come to dominate brain mapping research because it does not require people to undergo shots, surgery, or to ingest substances, or be exposed to ionising radiation, etc.
Other methods of obtaining contrast are arterial spin labeling and diffusion MRI.
The latter procedure is similar to MRI but uses the change in magnetization between oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor blood as its basic measure.
This measure is frequently corrupted by noise from various sources and hence statistical procedures are used to extract the underlying signal.
The resulting brain activation can be presented graphically by color-coding the strength of activation across the brain or the specific region studied.
The technique can localize activity to within millimeters but, using standard techniques, no better than within a window of a few seconds.
fMRI is used both in the research world, and to a lesser extent, in the clinical world.
It can also be combined and complemented with other measures of brain physiology such as EEG and NIRS.
Newer methods which improve both spatial and time resolution are being researched, and these largely use biomarkers other than the BOLD signal.
Some companies have developed commercial products such as lie detectors based on fMRI techniques, but the research is not believed to be ripe enough for widespread commercialization.