Human behavior refers to the array of every physical action and observable emotion associated with individuals, as well as the human race as a whole.
While specific traits of one's personality and temperament may be more consistent, other behaviors will change as one moves from birth through adulthood.
In addition to being dictated by age and genetics, behavior, driven in part by thoughts and feelings, is an insight into individual psyche, revealing among other things attitudes and values.
Social behavior, a subset of human behavior, study the considerable influence of social interaction and culture.
Additional influences include ethics, encircling, authority, rapport, hypnosis, persuasion and coercion.
The behavior of humans (and other organisms or even mechanisms) falls within a range with some behavior being common, some unusual, some acceptable, and some outside acceptable limits.
In sociology, behavior in general includes actions having no meaning, being not directed at other people, and thus all basic human actions.
Behavior in this general sense should not be mistaken with social behavior, which is a more advanced social action, specifically directed at other people.
The acceptability of behavior depends heavily upon social norms and is regulated by various means of social control.
Human behavior is studied by the specialized academic disciplines of psychiatry, psychology, social work, sociology, economics, and anthropology.
Human behavior is experienced throughout an individuals entire lifetime.
It includes the way they act based on different factors such as genetics, social norms, core faith, and attitude.
Behavior is impacted by certain traits each individual has.
The traits vary from person to person and can produce different actions or behavior from each person.
Social norms also impact behavior.
Due to the inherently conformist nature of human society in general, humans are pressured into following certain rules and displaying certain behaviors in society, which conditions the way people behave.
Different behaviors are deemed to be either acceptable or unacceptable in different societies and cultures.
Core faith can be perceived through the religion and philosophy of that individual.
It shapes the way a person thinks and this in turn results in different human behaviors.
Attitude can be defined as "the degree to which the person has a favorable or unfavorable evaluation of the behavior in question." One's attitude is essentially a reflection of the behavior he or she will portray in specific situations.
Thus, human behavior is greatly influenced by the attitudes we use on a daily basis.