Library science (often termed library studies, library and information science, bibliothecography) is an interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary field that applies the practices, perspectives, and tools of management, information technology, education, and other areas to libraries; the collection, organization, preservation, and dissemination of information resources; and the political economy of information.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Martin Schrettinger, a Bavarian librarian, coined the discipline within his work (1808-1828) Versuch eines vollstndigen Lehrbuchs der Bibliothek-Wissenschaft oder Anleitung zur vollkommenen Geschftsfhrung eines Bibliothekars.
=======
Martin Schrettinger, a Bavarian librarian, coined the discipline within his work (1808-1828) Versuch eines vollständigen Lehrbuchs der Bibliothek-Wissenschaft oder Anleitung zur vollkommenen Geschäftsführung eines Bibliothekars.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Rather than classifying information based on nature-oriented elements, as was previously done in his Bavarian library, Schrettinger organized books in alphabetical order.
The first American school for library science was founded by Melvil Dewey at Columbia University in 1887.
It is an aspect of the broader field of librarianship.
Historically, library science has also included archival science.
This includes how information resources are organized to serve the needs of select user group, how people interact with classification systems and technology, how information is acquired, evaluated and applied by people in and outside of libraries as well as cross-culturally, how people are trained and educated for careers in libraries, the ethics that guide library service and organization, the legal status of libraries and information resources, and the applied science of computer technology used in documentation and records management.
There is no generally agreed-upon distinction between the terms library science, librarianship, and library and information science, and to a certain extent they are interchangeable, perhaps differing most significantly in connotation.
The term library and information science (LIS) is most often used; most librarians consider it as only a terminological variation, intended to emphasize the scientific and technical foundations of the subject and its relationship with information science.
LIS should not be confused with information theory, the mathematical study of the concept of information.
Library and information science can also be seen as an integration of the two fields library science and information science, which were separate at one point.
Library philosophy has been contrasted with library science as the study of the aims and justifications of librarianship as opposed to the development and refinement of techniques.