Natural selection is the differential survival and reproduction of individuals due to differences in phenotype.
It is a key mechanism of evolution, the change in heritable traits of a population over time.
Charles Darwin popularised the term "natural selection"; he compared it with artificial selection (selective breeding).
Variation exists within all populations of organisms.
This occurs partly because random mutations arise in the genome of an individual organism, and offspring can inherit such mutations.
Throughout the lives of the individuals, their genomes interact with their environments to cause variations in traits.
(The environment of a genome includes the molecular biology in the cell, other cells, other individuals, populations, species, as well as the abiotic environment.) Individuals with certain variants of the trait may survive and reproduce more than individuals with other, less successful, variants.
Therefore, the population evolves.
Factors that affect reproductive success are also important, an issue that Darwin developed in his ideas on sexual selection (which was redefined as being included in natural selection in the 1930s when biologists considered it relatively unimportant,) and on fecundity selection, for example.
Natural selection acts on the phenotype, or the observable characteristics of an organism, but the genetic (heritable) basis of any phenotype that gives a reproductive advantage may become more common in a population (see allele frequency). Over time, this process can result in populations that specialise for particular ecological niches (microevolution) and may eventually result in the emergence of new species (macroevolution). In other words, natural selection is an important process (though not the only process) by which evolution takes place within a population of organisms.
Natural selection can be contrasted with artificial selection, in which humans intentionally choose specific traits (although they may not always get what they want). In natural selection there is no intentional choice.
In other words, artificial selection is teleological and natural selection is not teleological.
Natural selection is one of the cornerstones of modern biology.
The concept, published by Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace in a joint presentation of papers in 1858, was elaborated in Darwin's influential 1859 book On the Origin of Species, which described natural selection as analogous to artificial selection, a process by which animals and plants with traits considered desirable by human breeders are systematically favoured for reproduction.
The concept of natural selection originally developed in the absence of a valid theory of heredity; at the time of Darwin's writing, science had yet to develop modern theories of genetics.
The union of traditional Darwinian evolution with subsequent discoveries in classical and molecular genetics is termed the modern evolutionary synthesis.
Natural selection remains the primary explanation for adaptive evolution.