In academic publishing, a scientific journal is a periodical publication intended to further the progress of science, usually by reporting new research.
There are thousands of scientific journals in publication, and many more have been published at various points in the past (see list of scientific journals). Most journals are highly specialized, although some of the oldest journals such as Nature publish articles and scientific papers across a wide range of scientific fields.
Scientific journals contain articles that have been peer reviewed, in an attempt to ensure that articles meet the journal's standards of quality, and scientific validity.
Although scientific journals are superficially similar to professional magazines, they are actually quite different.
Issues of a scientific journal are rarely read casually, as one would read a magazine.
The publication of the results of research is an essential part of the scientific method.
If they are describing experiments or calculations, they must supply enough details that an independent researcher could repeat the experiment or calculation to verify the results.
Each such journal article becomes part of the permanent scientific record.
The history of scientific journals dates from 1665, when the French Journal des sçavans and the English Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society first began systematically publishing research results.
Over a thousand, mostly ephemeral, were founded in the 18th century, and the number has increased rapidly after that.
Articles in scientific journals can be used in research and higher education.
Scientific articles allow researchers to keep up to date with the developments of their field and direct their own research.
An essential part of a scientific article is citation of earlier work.
The impact of articles and journals is often assessed by counting citations (citation impact). Some classes are partially devoted to the explication of classic articles, and seminar classes can consist of the presentation by each student of a classic or current paper.
Schoolbooks and textbooks have been written usually only on established topics, while the latest research and more obscure topics are only accessible through scientific articles.
In a scientific research group or academic department it is usual for the content of current scientific journals to be discussed in journal clubs.
Academic credentials for promotion into academic ranks are established in large part by the number and impact of scientific articles published, and many doctoral programs allow for thesis by publication, where the candidate is required to publish a certain number of scientific articles.
The standards that a journal uses to determine publication can vary widely.
Some journals, such as Nature, Science, PNAS, and Physical Review Letters, have a reputation of publishing articles that mark a fundamental breakthrough in their respective fields.
In many fields, an informal hierarchy of scientific journals exists; the most prestigious journal in a field tends to be the most selective in terms of the articles it will select for publication, and will also have the highest impact factor.
It is also common for journals to have a regional focus, specializing in publishing papers from a particular country or other geographic region, like African Invertebrates.
Articles tend to be highly technical, representing the latest theoretical research and experimental results in the field of science covered by the journal.
They are often incomprehensible to anyone except for researchers in the field and advanced students.
In some subjects this is inevitable given the nature of the content.
Usually, rigorous rules of scientific writing are enforced by the editors; however, these rules may vary from journal to journal, especially between journals from different publishers.
Articles are usually either original articles reporting completely new results or reviews of current literature.
There are also scientific publications that bridge the gap between articles and books by publishing thematic volumes of chapters from different authors.