<<<<<<< HEAD
Telecommunication is  according to Article 1.3 of the International Telecommunication Union's (ITU) Radio Regulations (RR)  defined as "Any transmission, emission or reception of signs, signals, writings, images and sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire, radio, optical or other electromagnetic systems." This definition is also identical to those contained in the Annex to the Constitution and Convention of the International Telecommunication Union (Geneva, 1992).
=======
Telecommunication is – according to Article 1.3 of the International Telecommunication Union's (ITU) Radio Regulations (RR) – defined as "Any transmission, emission or reception of signs, signals, writings, images and sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire, radio, optical or other electromagnetic systems." This definition is also identical to those contained in the Annex to the Constitution and Convention of the International Telecommunication Union (Geneva, 1992).
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Telecommunication occurs when the exchange of information between two or more entities (communication) includes the use of technology.
Communication technology uses channels to transmit information (as electrical signals), either over a physical medium (such as signal cables), or in the form of electromagnetic waves.
The word is often used in its plural form, telecommunications, because it involves many different technologies.
Early means of communicating over a distance included visual signals, such as beacons, smoke signals, semaphore telegraphs, signal flags, and optical heliographs.
Other examples of pre-modern long-distance communication included audio messages such as coded drumbeats, lung-blown horns, and loud whistles.
Modern technologies for long-distance communication usually involve electrical and electromagnetic technologies, such as telegraph, telephone, and teleprinter, networks, radio, microwave transmission, fiber optics, and communications satellites.
A revolution in wireless communication began in the first decade of the 20th century with the pioneering developments in radio communications by Guglielmo Marconi, who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1909.
Other highly notable pioneering inventors and developers in the field of electrical and electronic telecommunications include Charles Wheatstone and Samuel Morse (telegraph), Alexander Graham Bell (telephone), Edwin Armstrong, and Lee de Forest (radio), as well as Vladimir K. Zworykin, John Logie Baird and Philo Farnsworth (television).