Yuval Levin is an Israeli-born American political analyst, public intellectual, academic and journalist who is the founding Editor of National Affairs.
He has been called "probably the most influential conservative intellectual of the Obama era", while The New Republic has dubbed Levin "the right's new Irving Kristol." Levin is also a fellow at the Ethics and Public Policy Center, a conservative think tank in Washington, D.C. In 2005 and 2006, he was a member of the White House domestic policy staff.
He is the former chief of staff of the President's Council on Bioethics, a former Congressional staffer, contributing editor to National Review and the Weekly Standard, and one of the founders of The New Atlantis, where he still remains as a Senior Editor.
He is the author of Tyranny of Reason, Imagining the Future, The Great Debate: Edmund Burke, Thomas Paine, and the Birth of Left and Right and of numerous essays and articles dealing largely with political theory, science, technology, and public policy.
On the relationship between political theory and public policy, Levin has said, "For me, these things are very deeply connected.
I think politics really is rooted in political philosophy, is much better understood when it’s understood in light of political philosophy.
And that a lot of the policy debates we have make much more sense if you see that people are arguing about two ways of understanding what the human person is, what human society is, and especially what the liberal society is.
The left and right in our country are both liberal, they both believe in the free society, but they mean something very different by that."
In describing conservatism, Levin was said, "That’s what conservatism really means, fundamentally, is to understand society not as just individuals and government, but to think of it in terms of everything happens in between.
That huge space between the individual and the state is where society actually is.
And that’s where families are, it’s where communities are, it’s where the market economy is." 
Levin was trained in political science at American University and earned a PhD from the Committee on Social Thought at the University of Chicago.