An aspiring opera singer In-jeong travels to countryside with her college professor Yeong-seon.
She wants to learn more about the outcome of her audition for a part in an upcoming opera performance.
The two park on a deserted riverbank to make a campfire.
Instead of talking about the audition, Yeong-seon tries to rape In-jeong who escapes to a forest.
Yeong-seon wants to leave but his car gets stuck.
Three local thugs with motorcycles discover the car and confront him.
Meanwhile, In-jeong stops a man on a scooter who promises to take her to a public transport terminal after they meet his friends who are waiting at the river.
As it turns out, he is the leader of the group and takes In-jeong back to the riverbank where she reunites with the scared Yeong-seon but the two do not admit knowing each other.
The thugs eat roasted pork and have a small talk with the professor when a young student Hyeon-jae rolls out from a bag that was placed on one of the motorcycles.
The thug leader starts harassing the boy.
His behavior becomes more psychotic when In-jeong voices her disapproval.
He orders the thugs to rape her and forces the student and Yeong-seon to fight until one of them drops.
Hyeon-jae knows taekwondo and easily defeats Yeong-seon.
He then proceeds to beat the thugs.
With all of them unconscious, the boy digs a hole in the ground, buries the men up to their chests and pours gasoline on their heads preparing to set them on fire.
Yeong-seon runs for help and In-jeong tries to stop the student.
While she's talking to him, the leader regains consciousness and manages to hit the boy with a shovel and escape from the hole.
After waking up, one of the thugs beats the injured boy so badly that all believe him dead.
Meanwhile, Yeong-seon finds a police officer that fined him earlier that day and tells him about the thugs and the boy.
The policeman happens to be the boy's older brother Moon-jae.
When they arrive to the riverbank, they don't find anybody because the thugs locked the boy in the car's trunk and left to drive the car into the river at a different place.
The boy eventually regains consciousness and shoots several times from a revolver he'd been hiding all the time.
The car crashes and the policeman is able to find them.
He recognizes the thug leader to be his former schoolmate Bong-yeon that he used to bully and physically abuse.
The kidnapping and torture of his brother was meant to be a revenge for this abuse.
The policeman proceeds with mocking and beating Bong-yeon in a manner that resembles his behavior at school.
After beating him up, he leaves taking a small tin box from one of the thugs.
The box originally contained cough powder but one of the thugs replaced it with a poison he used for catching birds.
Believing it to be cocaine, the policeman samples the poison and dies shortly after becoming the only victim of the whole episode.