The self-loathing Charlie Kaufman is hired to write the screenplay for The Orchid Thief.
Kaufman is going through depression and is not happy that his twin brother, Donald, has moved into his house and is mooching from him.
Donald decides to become a screenwriter like Charlie and attends one of Robert McKee's famous seminars.
Charlie, who rejects formulaic script writing, wants to ensure that his script is a faithful adaptation of The Orchid Thief.
However, he comes to realize that the book does not have a usable narrative and that it is impossible to turn into a film, leaving him with a serious case of writer's block.
Already well over his deadline with Columbia Pictures, and despairing at writing his script with self-reference, Charlie travels to New York to discuss the screenplay with Orlean directly.
Unable to face her and with the surprising news that Donald's spec script for a clichd psychological thriller, called The 3, is selling for six or seven figures, Kaufman resorts to attending McKee's seminar in New York and asks him for advice.
Charlie ends up asking Donald to join him in New York to assist with the story structure.
Donald pretends to be Charlie and interviews Orlean, but is suspicious of her account of the events of her book because she acts as though she is lying.
He and his brother Charlie follow Orlean to Florida where she meets Laroche, the orchid-stealing protagonist of Orlean's book and her secret lover.
It is revealed that the Seminole wanted the ghost orchid in order to manufacture a drug that causes fascination; Laroche introduces this drug to Orlean.
After Laroche and Orlean catch Charlie observing them taking the drug and having sex, she decides that Charlie must die.
Orlean forces Charlie at gunpoint to drive to the swamp, where she intends to kill him.
Charlie and Donald escape and hide in the swamp, where they resolve their differences and Charlie's problems with women.
Laroche accidentally shoots Donald.
Fleeing, Charlie and Donald drive off but crash into a ranger's truck; Donald dies in the accident.
Charlie runs off into the swamp to hide but is spotted by Laroche.
However, Laroche is killed by an alligator before being able to kill Charlie.
Orlean is arrested.
Charlie makes up with his mother, tells his former love interest Amelia that he is still in love with her, and finishes the script.
It ends with Charlie in a voice-over announcing the script is finished and that he wants Grard Depardieu to portray him in the film.