In 1973, 15-year-old William Miller aspires to be a rock journalist.
His single mother, Elaine, a radical college professor, wants him to become a lawyer.
Shunned by older classmates because of his young age, William, who loves rock music, writes free-lance articles for underground papers in San Diego.
Rock journalist Lester Bangs, impressed with William's writing, gives William a $35 assignment to write a review of a Black Sabbath concert.
William is unable to get in backstage but the band Stillwater arrives and brings William inside with them after he praises their music.
Lead guitarist Russell Hammond takes a liking to William, partly because of William's new friendship with a rock groupie, Penny Lane, to whom Russell is attracted.
William accompanies Penny to the Riot House – the Hyatt Hotel on Sunset Boulevard - to meet with Stillwater.
Penny, feigning retirement from her rock groupie glory days, acts as William's chauffeur, but only to get close to Russell, for whom she has genuine feelings.
William is contacted by Ben Fong-Torres, editor of Rolling Stone, and, believing William is older, hires him to write a story.
William convinces Ben to let him write about upcoming band Stillwater, and he is instructed to go on the road with them.
William makes his first in an increasingly frustrating number of attempts to interview Russell.
Penny watches the interaction and sympathizes with William, who experiences tensions with the band due to his role as a journalist.
A new manager, Dennis, comes on board while Penny is told she must leave the tour before New York, where Leslie, Russell's ex-wife/girlfriend, is joining them.
During a poker game, the groupies are used as a stake.
Stillwater loses the groupies to the band Humble Pie for $50 and a case of Heineken.
When William tells Penny, she acts nonchalant but is devastated.
Penny and Doris, the band's tour bus, are left behind; Dennis has piled the band into a small chartered plane to play more gigs.
Penny goes to New York on her own, and shows up at the restaurant the band is at.
As they celebrate making the cover of Rolling Stone, Penny makes Leslie uncomfortable and is asked to leave.
William chases Penny back to her hotel, finding her overdosed on quaaludes, and calls for help.
Believing they are about to die in-flight during a severe storm, the group confesses their secrets to one another.
Jeff, the band's lead singer, insults Penny.
William defends her and discloses that he loves her.
The plane lands safely, leaving everyone to ponder the changed atmosphere.
William travels to the Rolling Stone office in San Francisco to finish the article, parting ways with the band in the airport.
Upset about Penny, he writes the article, telling the truth.
The Rolling Stone editors cannot publish it until the band verifies the facts.
Fearful the story will damage the band's image, Russell denies that the story is true to the Rolling Stone fact checker.
William is crushed and the story is dead.
Sitting dejected in the airport, he runs into his sister, Anita, a flight attendant.
She suggests they take a trip together.
William, exhausted, chooses for them to go home to San Diego to see their mother.
Backstage at the Miami Orange Bowl, groupie Sapphire chastises Russell, saying that everyone knows what the band did to William.
Russell calls Penny and asks for her address, telling her he wants to meet.
Unbeknownst to Russell, she gives him William's address in an attempt to resolve their conflict.
Russell arrives at the house, believing it is Penny's home, but is greeted by Elaine; Russell then realizes where he is.
William and Russell reconcile and Russell reveals that he called Rolling Stone to verify William's article.
Russell then gives William a proper interview; Penny purchases a ticket to Morocco, and William's story is published with Stillwater on the cover of Rolling Stone.