Johnny Truelove is a young marijuana dealer living in Southern California. His father, Sonny, supplies him with marijuana, which Johnny distributes to his gang of friends, including Jake Mazursky, who owes him a $1,200 drug debt. Jake makes a failed attempt at asking his father Butch and stepmother Olivia for the money. Meanwhile, Butch and Olivia are dealing with their rebellious teenage son Zack, who admires his older brother. A fight breaks out between Jake and Johnny when Jake tries to pay Johnny only part of his debt. After back and forth retaliation, Johnny and his two henchmen, Frankie Ballenbacher and Tiko Martinez, go to confront Jake in person, but when they arrive at his house he is nowhere to be found. As they leave, they find Zack walking on the side of the road and decide to kidnap him with the intent of holding on to him until Jake pays his debt.
Wanting a break from his home life, Zack makes no effort to escape. Johnny pawns Zack off on Frankie, who offers him a chance to escape, but Zack declines the offer, not wanting to cause any trouble for his brother. Zack stays with Frankie at his father's house, and the two strike up an unlikely friendship. The next day, he ingratiates himself with Frankie's friends, including Keith Stratten, Susan Hartunian, and Julie Beckley, the youngest member of the group, although Susan is the only one who seems concerned.
Frankie grows nervous when Johnny tells him they could be in serious trouble for the kidnapping and hypothetically offers him $2,500 to murder Zack. Frankie furiously declines and Johnny claims it was just a joke. Instead, Johnny agrees to Frankie's plan to pay Zack to keep his mouth shut. However, after a threatening phone call from Jake, and a phone call from his lawyer who reveals he could face life in prison for kidnapping, he decides the risk of ending up dead or in prison is too great to let Zack go. Johnny calls his associate Elvis Schmidt and offers to erase his drug debt if he kills Zack. Frankie and his friends still believe Zack will be returning home at the end of the night and throw a raucous going away party. Zack has a good time at the party and later goes skinny-dipping with Julie and her friend Alma in the pool, which leads to a three-some. After the party, Julie gives Zack her number and Alma gives him a good-bye kiss on the cheek.
Elvis arrives at the hotel where Zack is waiting to be picked up, and Frankie and Elvis begin to argue when Elvis reveals Johnny sent him there to kill Zack. When Frankie leaves, Elvis takes Keith to dig a grave. Frankie offers Zack a final opportunity to escape, but believing that he is now part of the group and will be returning home soon, Zack prefers to wait at the hotel for Elvis to return. Meanwhile, Sonny, Cosmo (Johnny's godfather), and Johnny's lawyer confront Johnny, who refuses to call off the hit. Elvis and Keith return to the hotel, and Frankie and Elvis go outside to talk. Frankie, reluctant because of the friendship he has formed with Zack, finally relents when Elvis tells him they could face life in prison if Zack tells someone what happened.
Frankie, Elvis, Zack, and Keith arrive at the grave site. Zack is not aware of what's going on and grows suspicious when a deeply saddened Keith tells Frankie he can't go through with it, and goes to wait in the car after giving Zack a goodbye hug. When Zack sees the grave he begins to break down, and begs Frankie and Elvis to let him go. Frankie tells Elvis they shouldn't go through with it, but Elvis is keen on the job he's been given. Frankie calms Zack down, and ties him up with duct tape. Elvis then knocks Zack into the grave with a shovel, and shoots him multiple times with an automatic Tec 9, killing him.
Zack's body is found three days later. The epilogue shows the aftermath of the crime: his mother Olivia, now suffering from depression, is interviewed, and talks candidly about her failed suicide attempts and the loss that she has experienced from her son's death. Susan angrily confronts Frankie over Zack's death and goes to the authorities. Elvis is caught while trying to secure a ride out of L.A. Johnny flees the city and arrives at the house of old classmate Buzz Fecske, who drives him back to Cosmo's house, where he enters and is not seen again.
Tiko, Keith and Frankie are arrested, and after being convicted, they all serve their respective sentences: Tiko is convicted of kidnapping and sentenced to nine years, Keith is convicted of digging Zack's grave and remains at the California Youth Authority until the age of 25, Frankie is convicted of kidnapping and second degree murder and receives a life sentence, Elvis is convicted of first degree murder and remains at San Quentin State Prison where he awaits the death penalty, Johnny, however, is nowhere to be found. The interviewer asks Sonny how Johnny was able to escape authorities for four years without help, but Sonny assures him that he doesn't know where Johnny is. In 2005, after over five years of being on the America's most wanted list, Johnny is finally found and arrested in Paraguay. Text informs the audience that Johnny is in California awaiting trial, and, if proven guilty, faces the death penalty.