Erik Stifler and Mike "Cooze" Coozeman arrive at the University of Michigan as freshmen. Upon arriving at his dorm, Erik meets a girl named Ashley while she is taking a shower in the coed bathrooms. He then meets his new roommate Bobby and his girlfriend Margie while they are having sex. Erik eventually reunites with his cousin, Dwight Stifler, the leader of the Beta House fraternity, who invites Erik, Cooze, and Bobby to a Beta House party. They learn how they can gain eligibility to pledge for the Beta House and meet Wesley, the rush chair of the Beta House who experiences blackouts after drinking alcohol. Erik and Ashley begin dating, but on their first date at a restaurant, Erik accidentally spills hot soup on his legs, so Ashley brings him to her room to clean up. As Ashley rubs lotion on Erik's thigh, he develops an erection and accidentally ejaculates over her possessions. Erik apologizes and explains to Ashley that his girlfriend Tracy broke up with him, and he has not had sex in four months.
Meanwhile, Cooze falls in love with Ashley's roommate Denise; however, she is nervous to show him her genitalia and have sex with him, so she instead gives Cooze a handjob. After talking with Erik, Bobby, and Dwight about Denise, Cooze develops suspicions that Denise might have a penis, so Dwight encourages Cooze to find out. Alongside two other pledges, Erik, Cooze, and Bobby complete fifty tasks to pledge the Beta House, including: getting their posteriors signed by a stripper; having sex with a professor; marrying a male friend in Canada; and placing a live ostrich in the Geek House. After they complete their final task, Edgar, the president of the Geek House, challenges the Beta House to the Greek Olympiad. Beta House alumnus Noah Levenstein returns to campus to officiate the competition. The first competition is won by Beta House as Dwight and Edgar compete in removing girls' brassieres. Geek House win the next three competitions: a lightsaber duel, catching a greased pig and a two person "69" race.
Beta House win the fifth and sixth competitions: a Russian roulette challenge between Dwight and Edgar with aged horse semen; and a drinking competition won by Wesley. Dwight learns from Rock that Edgar previously had sex with a sheep, so Beta House uses his wool fetish against him in the final striptease challenge with Margie wearing a sheep costume, resulting in the Geek House losing the Greek Olympiad. The Beta House hosts a toga party, while Erik comes up with the idea of a new pledge task for the Beta House: having sex in a movie theater, and he does so with Ashley. Meanwhile, Cooze and Denise finally sleep together, and Cooze discovers that Denise was actually hiding the fact the she ejaculates during sex, much to his excitement. The following morning, Wesley wakes up after a blackout and discovers that he had sex with the Geek House bodybuilder. In a post-credits scene, Edgar instructs a stripper at Silver Dollar to dance with the headpiece of the sheep costume.