
<<<<<<< HEAD
Amlie Poulain was raised by eccentric parents who - erroneously believing that she had a heart defect - decided to home school her.
To cope with her loneliness, Amlie developed an active imagination and a mischievous personality.
After her mother is killed when a suicidal Qubecoise tourist jumped from a church roof and landed on her, her father's withdrawal from society worsens.
Amlie eventually decides to leave home and becomes a waitress at the Caf des 2 Moulins in Montmartre, which is staffed and frequented by a collection of eccentrics.
Spurning romantic relationships after a few disappointing efforts, she finds contentment in simple pleasures and lets her imagination roam free.
On 31 August 1997, startled by the news of the death of Princess Diana, Amlie drops a plastic perfume-stopper and accidentally discovers an old metal box of childhood memorabilia hidden by a boy who lived in her apartment decades earlier.
Amlie resolves to track down the boy and return the box to him.
She promises herself that if it makes him happy, she will devote her life to bringing happiness to others.
After inquiring the apartment's concierge and several old tenants about the boy's identity, Amlie meets her reclusive neighbour, Raymond Dufayel, an artist with Brittle bone disease who repaints Luncheon of the Boating Party by Pierre-Auguste Renoir every year.
He correctly recalls the name as "Bretodeau". Amlie quickly finds the man and surreptitiously passes him the box.
Moved to tears by the discovery and the memories it holds, Bretodeau resolves to reconcile with his estranged daughter and the grandson he has never met.
Amlie happily embarks on her new mission.
Amlie secretly executes complex schemes that affect the lives of those around her.
She escorts a blind man to the Mtro station, giving him a rich description of the street scenes he passes.
=======
Amélie Poulain was raised by eccentric parents who - erroneously believing that she had a heart defect - decided to home school her.
To cope with her loneliness, Amélie developed an active imagination and a mischievous personality.
After her mother is killed when a suicidal Québecoise tourist jumped from a church roof and landed on her, her father's withdrawal from society worsens.
Amélie eventually decides to leave home and becomes a waitress at the Café des 2 Moulins in Montmartre, which is staffed and frequented by a collection of eccentrics.
Spurning romantic relationships after a few disappointing efforts, she finds contentment in simple pleasures and lets her imagination roam free.
On 31 August 1997, startled by the news of the death of Princess Diana, Amélie drops a plastic perfume-stopper and accidentally discovers an old metal box of childhood memorabilia hidden by a boy who lived in her apartment decades earlier.
Amélie resolves to track down the boy and return the box to him.
She promises herself that if it makes him happy, she will devote her life to bringing happiness to others.
After inquiring the apartment's concierge and several old tenants about the boy's identity, Amélie meets her reclusive neighbour, Raymond Dufayel, an artist with Brittle bone disease who repaints Luncheon of the Boating Party by Pierre-Auguste Renoir every year.
He correctly recalls the name as "Bretodeau". Amélie quickly finds the man and surreptitiously passes him the box.
Moved to tears by the discovery and the memories it holds, Bretodeau resolves to reconcile with his estranged daughter and the grandson he has never met.
Amélie happily embarks on her new mission.
Amélie secretly executes complex schemes that affect the lives of those around her.
She escorts a blind man to the Métro station, giving him a rich description of the street scenes he passes.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
She persuades her father to follow his dream of touring the world by stealing his garden gnome and having a flight attendant friend airmail pictures of it posing with landmarks from all over the world.
She starts a romance between a middle-aged co-worker and one of the customers in the bar.
She convinces Mrs.
Wells that the husband who abandoned her had sent her a final conciliatory love letter just before his accidental death years before.
She uses Gaslighting tactics on Collignon, the nasty greengrocer.
Mentally exhausted, Collignon no longer abuses his meek but good-natured assistant Lucien.
A delighted Lucien takes charge at the grocery stand.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Mr. Dufayel, having observed Amlie, begins a conversation with her about his painting, a copy of Luncheon of the Boating Party.
Although he has copied the same painting 20 times, he has never quite captured the look of the girl drinking a glass of water.
They discuss the meaning of this character, and over several conversations Amlie begins projecting her loneliness on to the image.
Dufayel recognizes this, and uses the girl in the painting to push Amlie to examine her attraction to a quirky young man who collects the discarded photographs of strangers from passport photo booths.
When Amlie bumps into the young man a second time, she realizes she is falling in love with him.
He accidentally drops a photo album in the street.
Amlie retrieves it.
She discovers his name is Nino Quincampoix, and plays a cat-and-mouse game with him around Paris before returning his treasured album anonymously.
After arranging a meeting at the 2 Moulins, Amlie panics and tries to deny her identity.
Her co-worker, concerned for Amlie's well-being, screens Nino for her; a caf patron's comment about this misleads Amlie to believe she has lost Nino to the co-worker.
It takes Dufayel's insight to give her the courage to pursue Nino, resulting in a romantic night together and the beginning of a relationship, and Amlie finally finds happiness for herself.
=======
Mr. Dufayel, having observed Amélie, begins a conversation with her about his painting, a copy of Luncheon of the Boating Party.
Although he has copied the same painting 20 times, he has never quite captured the look of the girl drinking a glass of water.
They discuss the meaning of this character, and over several conversations Amélie begins projecting her loneliness on to the image.
Dufayel recognizes this, and uses the girl in the painting to push Amélie to examine her attraction to a quirky young man who collects the discarded photographs of strangers from passport photo booths.
When Amélie bumps into the young man a second time, she realizes she is falling in love with him.
He accidentally drops a photo album in the street.
Amélie retrieves it.
She discovers his name is Nino Quincampoix, and plays a cat-and-mouse game with him around Paris before returning his treasured album anonymously.
After arranging a meeting at the 2 Moulins, Amélie panics and tries to deny her identity.
Her co-worker, concerned for Amélie's well-being, screens Nino for her; a café patron's comment about this misleads Amélie to believe she has lost Nino to the co-worker.
It takes Dufayel's insight to give her the courage to pursue Nino, resulting in a romantic night together and the beginning of a relationship, and Amélie finally finds happiness for herself.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
