Following the events of Are We There Yet?, Nick Persons (Ice Cube) has married Suzanne (Nia Long) and moved in with her, Kevin (Philip Daniel Bolden), and Lindsey (Aleisha Allen) into his apartment, also purchasing a 2007 Cadillac Escalade (after the destruction of his Lincoln Navigator SUV). He has also sold his sports memorabilia store to his best friend, Marty (played by Jay Mohr in the first film). While getting ready for an interview with Magic Johnson, Suzanne tells Nick that she is pregnant and they later find out that there will be twins.
For more space, Suzanne and Nick go check out a house although Lindsey and Kevin - mainly the former - are against it. They meet Chuck Mitchell Jr. (John C. McGinley) there, and after some talking Nick decides to take the house. But he didn't get it inspected first and they find mold in the house, so throughout most of the movie Nick is angry with Chuck as he almost destroys their house. Meanwhile, Lindsey sneaks out to go to a party and when Nick finds out, he grounds her. He finally decides to fire Chuck, which causes Suzanne to take the kids and move to the guest house, with the parting shot You're the one who's tearing this family apart! After taking some time to think, Nick decides to fix the house on his own and also to apologize to Chuck. Chuck responds by bringing his friends to help, including Lindsey and Kevin.
When Suzanne goes into labor with the hospital half an hour away, Nick, Kevin and Lindsey have to deliver the babies. Chuck tries to get there, but his truck breaks down and he power-walks down to the house. While she's still in labor, Nick gets a call from Magic. After Suzanne gives birth to twins, the movie fast-forwards six months later to a big barbecue in their backyard at which Nick debuts his new magazine. Before the credits, the cartoon Nick Persons from the main titles appears and gets squished by the word "THE END", then kicks it off then brings the other characters, Coco the dog, Kevin Persons, Lindsey Persons, the Raccoon, and the Deer also from the main titles, then Suzanne and Chuck take a big bow before the screen fades to black, thus concluding the film series.