Morris Buttermaker (Billy Bob Thornton) is a washed-up alcoholic baseball player who was a pitcher for the Seattle Mariners before getting kicked out of professional baseball for attacking an umpire.
He works as an exterminator and is a crude womanizer.
He coaches the Bears, a children's baseball team with poor playing skills.
They play their first game and do not even make an out before he forfeits the game.
The entire team decides to quit after but Buttermaker forces them out of quitting and promises to be a better coach.
Amanda Whurlitzer (Sammi Kane Kraft), a skilled pitcher, is the 12-year-old daughter of one of his ex-girlfriends.
After a couple requests, she decides to join the team.
Kelly Leak, a local troublemaker but solid hitter, also joins the team, and the Bears start winning games.
The Bears eventually make it to the championship game.
In the middle of that game, the Bears and Yankees fight after Amanda is shoved during a play at the plate.
A few innings later the Yankees coach Ray Bullock (Greg Kinnear) has his son Joey intentionally walk Mike Engleberg, one of the Bears' best hitters.
Instead of walking him, he almost hits Engleberg, causing Ray to push Joey to the ground in anger.
As revenge, Joey throws Engleberg an easy pitch which he smacks for a home run and would leave the game with his mother.
Later, Buttermaker changes the lineup, putting the benchwarmers in and taking out some of the good players which causes the Bears to fall behind heading into the last half of the inning.
<<<<<<< HEAD
With two outs, one of the Bears players, Garo, drives in two runs and tries to score to tie the game but is thrown out at the plate on a close call, causing the Bears to lose the championship 87.
=======
With two outs, one of the Bears players, Garo, drives in two runs and tries to score to tie the game but is thrown out at the plate on a close call, causing the Bears to lose the championship 8–7.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
After the game, Buttermaker gives them non-alcoholic beer, and they spray it all over each other.
Although they did not win the championship, they have the satisfaction of trying, knowing that winning is not so important.