Over the two years since the death of Deacon Frost, Blade (Wesley Snipes), has been trying to find his mentor Whistler (Kris Kristofferson), who survived his suicide attempt.
With the aid of the human Scud (Norman Reedus), his new weapon designer, Blade tracks Whistler to eastern Europe; where he is in possession of a large vampire gang.
Interrogating the last-surviving member, Rush (Santiago Segura), Blade finds Whistler locked in a tank and kept alive to torture.
Blade brings Whistler back to the lair, and rids him of his vampirism with a cure developed by Dr.
Karen Jenson (whose failure to appear in the film is never explained).
Meanwhile, a crisis has arisen in the vampire community.
A mutated strain of vampirism (dubbed the "Reaper virus"), originated from Jared Nomak (Luke Goss), is sweeping through their ranks.
The Reapers are stronger and much harder to kill than common vampires, being almost invulnerable to any weapon with the exception of sunlight.
They also have a ravenous hunger, requiring more feeding than vampires, and anyone they bite, Human or Vampire, becomes a Reaper.
In order to combat the mutants, the vampire overlord Eli Damaskinos (Thomas Kretschmann) sends his minion, Asad (Danny John-Jules), and daughter Nyssa (Leonor Varela) to find and strike a truce with Blade.
After ascertaining that the Reapers are a threat to vampires and humans alike, Blade reluctantly allies with the vampires.
He teams up with the Bloodpack, an elite group of vampires originally assembled to kill him.
The group consists of Asad, Nyssa, Reinhardt (Ron Perlman), Chupa (Matt Schulze), Snowman (Donnie Yen), Verlaine (Marit Velle Kile), her lover Lighthammer (Daz Crawford), and Priest (Tony Curran). Blade plants an explosive on the back of Reinhardt's head to keep him under control.
The group starts at a vampire nightclub; while Whistler acts as a sniper to guard Scud in the team's transport.
The group finds out that the Reapers are immune to silver, physically stronger than normal vampires, and resistant to normally crippling injuries.
Priest is bitten, transformed and subsequently mercy-killed; Lighthammer is bitten but conceals the bite.
Outside, Whistler disappears and Scud is attacked by several Reapers, which he drives off with UV lights.
Blade fights Nomak, who is immune even to Blade's anti-coagulant spikes.
After a stalemated battle, Nomak retreats because of the sunlight.
Whistler returns after the battle and reveals his finding of the Reaper Nest down in the sewer.
Nyssa dissects a dead Reaper to learn more about them; Scud and Whistler make ultraviolet weapons for the team.
Upon entering the Reaper nest, the group spreads out.
Lighthammer transforms into a Reaper and kills Snowman.
He then chases down Verlaine who kills both herself and him by exposing them both to sunlight.
Chupa and Reinhardt begin provoking and assaulting Whistler, who sprays Chupa with a Reaper pheromone.
This attracts a horde which kills Chupa, while Whistler runs off.
Asad and Nyssa walk into a nest and Asad is pulled underwater and killed.
Blade saves Nyssa and uses a UV-emitting bomb which destroys all of the Reapers with the exception of Nomak.
Nyssa and Reinhardt escape the blast.
Damaskinos' forces betray and capture Blade, Whistler, and Scud.
It is revealed that the Reapers' exist as a result of Damaskinos' efforts to create a stronger breed of vampires.
Nomak, the first Reaper, is his own son; and thus is Nyssa's brother.
Scud is also revealed to be one of Damaskinos' familiars.
However, Blade, having been suspicious of him since the beginning of their involvement with Damaskinos, kills Scud with Reinhardt's bomb after he reclaims it.
Believing the Reapers are gone; Damaskinos plans to dissect Blade to learn the secret behind Daywalkers'. He traps Blade and begins draining his blood.
Whistler escapes and frees Blade, killing Damaskinos' human lawyer Karel Kounen in the process.
Whistler takes Blade to the Blood pool where Damaskinos drinks blood and Blade restores his strength and fights his way through Damaskinos' henchmen and kills Reinhardt.
Meanwhile, Nomak enters Damaskinos' stronghold seeking revenge on his father.
Nyssa, disillusioned with her father, betrays Damaskinos by sealing off their escape route to the heliport.
Damaskinos is killed by Nomak after failing to negotiate with him.
Nomak then bites Nyssa, infecting her with the Reaper virus while drinking her blood.
Blade then confronts Nomak and the two engage in a brutal fight.
Eventually, Blade fatally stabs Nomak in his only weak spot.
With his revenge complete, and wanting to end the suffering, Nomak pushes the blade further in; killing himself.
Blade carries Nyssa outside; fulfilling her wish to see sunshine with her own eyes.
She dies peacefully.
With the crisis over, Blade goes to London where he tracks Rush down and kills him.