When a body is found hanging on top of the sign demarcating the Ontario-Quebec border, police officers from both Canadian provinces must join forces to solve the murder.
David Bouchard (Patrick Huard) is a rule-bending, francophone detective for the Sret du Qubec, while Martin Ward (Colm Feore) is a by-the-book anglophone Ontario Provincial Police detective.
The bilingual detectives must resolve their professional and cultural differences as well as their bigotry and prejudices.
The body is identified as Benoit Brisset, a hockey executive.
The clues lead the pair to Luc Therrien (Sylvain Marcel) at a roadside bar.
After a fight in the bar, they imprison him in the trunk of Bouchard's car.
Bouchard has promised to watch his daughter's ballet recital, so he drives to the recital and parks the car in front with Therrien still locked in the trunk.
When they emerge, they find the car being towed from the no-parking zone, and as they try to chase down the truck driver, the car explodes.
With their prime witness dead, they decide to search Therrien's house where they find a large marijuana grow-op in the basement.
They also discover another body, a former hockey team owner.
A laser tripwire is activated by Bouchard, which sets the house on fire, destroying the house and causing the two cops to get high on the fumes of the burning marijuana.
When they are disciplined by Bouchard's police chief shortly afterwards, he angrily removes them from the case after they start laughing hysterically because they're still high.
The next victim is discovered in Toronto.
They realize that the killer has a pattern of tattooing his victims, with each tattoo providing a clue to the next murder victim.
Each murder is in some way connected to major league hockey.
(The film uses thinly disguised parodies of National Hockey League teams, owners and players, however, rather than the real league.) The pair anticipate the next victim, but he goes missing before they reach him.
Ward and Bouchard appear on a hockey broadcast to warn people in the hockey community to be vigilant.
The "Tattoo Killer" calls in to the show and threatens the two police officers, causing a brawl between them and the anchor when they attempt to hang up.
Ward is attacked in his home by a masked assailant whom he discovers is Therrien.
Meanwhile, Bouchard has sex with Ward's sister.
The "Tattoo Killer" kidnaps Bouchard's daughter, leading to the final confrontation with the two policemen.
It is ultimately revealed that the murders are being committed by a bilingual portly hockey fan (Luc Therrien), as previously mentioned, under the direction and unequal partnership of a sadistic, psychopathic, sociopathic, fan of the notion of the game of hockey as a Canadian nationalistic symbol that he feels is being permanently corrupted by attempts to move ownership of Canadian teams to venture capitalist groups in the United States.
He is therefore having Therrien committ the murders along with him (with the tattoos as a signature), as revenge against the hockey league for desecrating the game by moving Canadian teams such as the "Quebec Fleur de Lys" to the United States.
They try to reason with him that hockey is just a game, but this only angers him.
Ward distracts the man while Bouchard unties his daughter.
After a fight, the killer is blown up by one of his own explosives.
During the credits, a news report is shown, revealing that the hockey teams will not be moved.