Bruce Nolan (Jim Carrey) is a television field reporter for Eyewitness News at WKBW-TV in Buffalo, New York, but desires to be the news anchorman.
He is in a healthy relationship with his girlfriend Grace Connelly (Jennifer Aniston), but also has a mild crush on his co-worker, Susan Ortega (Catherine Bell), who barely seems to notice him.
Bruce however continues to suffer unfortunate events and it reaches his breaking point when he is passed over for promotion by his rival, Evan Baxter (Steve Carell), who then steals dialogue from Bruce's segment in accepting the promotion on-air.
Bruce becomes furious and aggressively and profanely criticizes the station during his first live report, leading to his dismissal from the station.
Following a series of other misfortunes, Bruce complains that God (Morgan Freeman) is "the one that should be fired." Bruce later receives a message on his pager, directing him to an empty warehouse where he meets God, who offers to give Bruce His powers to prove that He is doing the job correctly.
God tells Bruce that there are rules to the job he must follow, albeit only two: firstly, Bruce cannot tell anyone else that he has God's powers; and secondly, Bruce cannot use the powers to alter or interfere with free will.
Bruce ignores God and is initially jubilant with the powers, using them for personal gain, such as training his dog to use the toilet, chasing away thugs by spewing out a swarm of hornets, and sexually impressing Grace.
Bruce also finds ways of using the powers to cause miraculous events to occur at otherwise mundane events that he covers, such as discovering Jimmy Hoffa's body or causing a meteor to harmlessly land near a cook-off, earning him his job back.
Bruce then uses his powers to cause Evan to make a fool out of himself on-air, causing Evan to be fired in favor of Bruce as the new anchor.
After taking Grace to a fancy dinner and telling her he made anchor (angering her, as she thought he was going to propose), Bruce begins to hear voices in his head.
He re-encounters God, who confronts Bruce on using his powers for personal gain and not helping people.
He also explains that the voices are prayers to God that Bruce must deal with.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Bruce creates a computerized email-like system to receive the prayers and respond, but finds that the influx is far too great for him to handle  even though God had stated that Bruce is only receiving prayers from the Buffalo area  and sets the program to automatically answer Yes to every prayer.
=======
Bruce creates a computerized email-like system to receive the prayers and respond, but finds that the influx is far too great for him to handle — even though God had stated that Bruce is only receiving prayers from the Buffalo area — and sets the program to automatically answer Yes to every prayer.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Bruce attends a party celebrating his promotion.
When Grace arrives, she finds Bruce being seduced and kissed by Susan and storms out.
Bruce follows Grace, but she is heartbroken and will not listen to him.
He tries to use his powers to convince Grace to stay but cannot influence her free will.
As Bruce looks around, he realizes that the city has fallen into chaos due to his actions.
Bruce returns to God, who explains that despite how chaotic things seem, there is always a way to make things right, and that Bruce must figure out a way to solve it himself.
Bruce then begins to solve his problems in life practically, such as helping a man whose car broke down across the street, training his dog normally and allowing Evan to have his job back.
Bruce returns to his computer system and goes about answering prayers as best he can.
As he reads through them, he finds a prayer from Grace, wishing for Bruce's success and well-being.
As he reads it, another prayer from Grace arrives, this one wishing not to be in love with Bruce anymore.
Bruce is stunned and walks alone on a highway, asking God to take back His powers and letting his fate be in His hands.
Bruce is suddenly struck by a truck and regains consciousness in a white void.
God appears and asks Bruce what he really wants; Bruce admits that he only wants to make sure Grace finds a man that would make her happy.
<<<<<<< HEAD
God agrees and Bruce finds himself in the hospital, shortly after being revived  near miraculously  by the doctors.
=======
God agrees and Bruce finds himself in the hospital, shortly after being revived — near miraculously — by the doctors.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Grace arrives and the two rekindle their relationship, with Bruce and Grace later becoming engaged.
After his recovery, Bruce returns to his field reporting but takes more pleasure in the simple stories.
Bruce and Grace announce their engagement on live TV.
The film ends with the beggar Bruce previously ran into on various occasions finally revealing himself to be God.