Eleven years after the events of the first film, Dante (Brian O'Halloran) opens the Quick Stop convenience store to find that it is on fire; Randal (Jeff Anderson) had left the coffee pot on after closing the night before.
<<<<<<< HEAD
As a result of the destruction of Quick Stop and the adjacent RST Video, Dante and Randal begin working at a Mooby's fast food restaurant along with Elias (Trevor Fehrman) and their manager Becky Scott (Rosario Dawson). A year later, Dante is planning to leave his minimum wage lifestyle in favor of a family life in Florida with his fiance Emma Bunting (Jennifer Schwalbach), whose father will provide them with a home and a business to run.
=======
As a result of the destruction of Quick Stop and the adjacent RST Video, Dante and Randal begin working at a Mooby's fast food restaurant along with Elias (Trevor Fehrman) and their manager Becky Scott (Rosario Dawson). A year later, Dante is planning to leave his minimum wage lifestyle in favor of a family life in Florida with his fiancée Emma Bunting (Jennifer Schwalbach), whose father will provide them with a home and a business to run.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
This leaves Randal bitterly disappointed, who fears that with Dante moving to Florida would leave him without his best friend.
Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith) have since followed Dante and Randal, and now loiter outside of Mooby's. Jay and Silent Bob no longer do drugs after they were arrested for the possession of drugs and were sent to rehab, and become devout Christians following their release.
However, the duo continue selling drugs.
Dante eventually confesses to Becky that he is worried about dancing at his wedding, so she takes him up onto the roof of the restaurant to teach him some moves.
Dante soon lets go of his inhibitions and learns how to dance.
When the song ends, Dante, caught up in the moment, tells Becky he loves her, and she reveals to him that she is pregnant; Dante and Becky had a one night stand on the prep table a few weeks before.
Becky tells Dante not to tell anyone about the baby; however Dante tells Randal, and an angered Becky leaves when she learns that Dante told Randal.
Randal encourages Dante to leave Mooby's in search for Becky, and in the meantime, sets up a surprise going away party for Dante.
Randal hires "Kinky Kelly and the Sexy Stud," a donkey show with a fog machine.
When Dante comes back, he mistakes the fog for a fire and calls the fire department, but upon discovering that it is not a fire, he proceeds to watch the show with Randal, Jay, Silent Bob, and Elias.
The group soon discovers that "Kinky Kelly" is, in fact, the donkey, while the man (Zak Knutson), whom Randal thought to be the pimp, is "The Sexy Stud". When Becky returns, Dante confesses his love for her.
As they kiss, Emma arrives.
She throws her engagement ring at Becky and angrily walks off.
The fire and police departments soon arrive and discover the show.
Dante, Randal, Elias, Jay, Silent Bob, and The Sexy Stud are detained and jailed.
Although they are informed they will soon be released, Dante blames Randal for ruining his life and expresses his eagerness to start a new life without Randal, while Randal condemns Dante for his willingness to live his life under the standards of others and for walking out of their friendship.
Amid the argument, Randal proposes that they buy the Quick Stop and re-open it, although Dante says that neither have the money to purchase the store.
Jay and Silent Bob offer to lend them some money (from the royalties they collected following the events of Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back) on the condition that they can hangout outside of the Quick Stop anytime they want.
Randal accepts their offer, but Dante remains skeptical, prompting Randal to emotionally confess his fear of losing Dante.
As a result, Dante agrees to the proposition as well, and after his release, he proposes to Becky, who accepts.
After the Quick Stop and RST Video are rebuilt, Elias applies for a job and is hired at RST Video.
In the very last scene, with the store open, Dante says, "Can you feel it? Today is the first day of the rest of our lives."