Dan Burns (Steve Carell) is a newspaper advice columnist, a widower, and concerned, borderline-helicopter, single-parent to his three girls, -older teens Jane (Alison Pill), and Cara (Britt Robertson), and precocious, young Lilly (Marlene Lawston). The family takes a trip from their New Jersey suburban home to the rambling, Rhode Island home of his parents (Dianne Wiest and John Mahoney) for an annual family gathering. Also in attendance are Dan's sister and brother (Norbert Leo Butz) their families and his younger brother, Mitch (Dane Cook), a shallow, though likeable personal trainer based in New York City.
Sulky Cara does not want to go, and leave her boyfriend Marty (Felipe Dieppa) with whom she claims to have fallen in love, "in just three days," initializing a repetitive theme of love-at-first sight. Dan, insisting that it is "not possible to fall in love in three days," gently but firmly insists. The morning after their arrival, Dan's mother encourages him to go into town, to give his daughters breathing room. Lonely and bemused, Dan visits a bookstore, where an attractive foreign customer, (Juliette Binoche), mistakes him for an employee. Dan and Marie bond over a "small planet" sized muffin and a heart-felt chat about his life since losing his wife to cancer. The stranger, whose preferred name is Marie, agrees to speak with Dan again before leaving, but gently warns Dan that she has a boyfriend. Dan returns to his parents' house and elatedly tells Mitch and Clay that he has met someone. They call on the women in the house for advice over Dan meeting, "a hottie" and Mitch calls out for his new girlfriend, Annie, to get into the mix. Lo and behold, Dan's Marie is Mitch's Annie. Later, on a family beach walk, Dan is visibly disheartened, but makes small talk with his Dad about the possibility of his advice column being nationally syndicated, and miserably resists his father's relationship advice about finding someone of his own.
Dan and Marie spend the majority of the weekend attempting to deny and resist their growing attraction and obvious suitability to each other. Set up on a blind date by his mother, and egged on by Mitch, Dan reluctantly agrees to a foursome dinner with their once unattractive childhood friend, Ruthie "pig-faced" Draper (Emily Blunt), who is now a plastic surgeon, and visiting town. The evening has the unexpected, charming effect of bringing out Marie's deeper feelings for Dan as she jealously watches him and Ruthie. The next morning, now convinced that her jealous surliness is proof of her attraction to him, Dan smugly, and almost lovingly, endures her 'punishment' for his late night with Ruthie by eating the burnt pancakes which she serves only him, and later openly flirts with her during family football, the latter behavior drawing reproofs from Jane.
The next morning, Cara's boyfriend Marty arrives, and Dan brusquely sends him on his way, sparking a love-lorn, teen tantrum from Cara.
That night, during the family talent show, Dan surprises everyone by accompanying nervous Mitch on guitar in a rendition of Pete Townshend's "Let My Love Open the Door". After Mitch forgets a stanza, Dan steps in, desperately serenading Marie in front of a clueless Mitch. Marie, unable to further deny her feelings for Dan, leaves a distraught Mitch during breakfast. On her drive out of town, Marie calls Dan, and they meet to talk at a bowling alley. Unable to contain themselves any longer, the meeting evolves into a date complete with bowling, glitter ball, romantic music courtesy of the establishment's owner, and finally a passionate kiss. Unfortunately, Dan's entire family, apparently set on bowling, arrive at this disastrous moment. Shocked and infuriated at his older brother's betrayal, Mitch punches Dan in the face, and Marie hurries out apologetically. Desperate to catch her, Dan hastily reverses and crashes squarely into the cruiser of the local police officer who had already issued him two prior citations that weekend.
Later, he returns to his parents' home to find the father and daughter owners of the newspaper group interested in his column's syndication. With Mitch and the family sitting in, Dan is acutely aware of his hypocritical behavior with Marie, especially in light of his over-parenting, and, in particular, his dismissive cynicism about Cara's romance. Dan finally talks to his daughters, promising to be more present for them, which they immediately resist. This forces his realization and confession of being in love with Marie, even though he has "only known her three days." Encouraged by his parents and precocious Lily to "go get her", he goes after Marie with all three approving daughters happily in tow.
The plot resolves with Dan and his daughters reaching New York City, where they finally find Marie at her gym. As he makes eye contact with her, Dan, in voice-over, tells the readers of his first nationally-syndicated column that instead of merely planning ahead in life, they should "plan to be surprised".
The final scene shows Dan and Marie celebrating their wedding at his parents' Rhode Island home. Mitch is seen happily dancing with Ruthie Draper, and Cara is dancing with her boyfriend Marty.
The camera closes on Sondre Lerche and band performing Modern Nature.