Kyle (Jim Verraros) breaks up with Marc (Brett Chukerman), his love interest from the first movie, accusing him of flirting with hotter men. Kyle, Tiffani (Rebekah Kochan) and Gwen, friends from the first movie, all become attracted to Troy (Marco Dapper), a chiseled farm boy from Troy, Illinois, who poses nude for their art class. Troy befriends and confides in them that he has slept with both women and men, but is reluctant to embrace any gay feelings. Kyle and the girls devise a scheme in which Kyle pretends to be an ex-gay who is dating Tiffani, to overcome Troy's inhibitions and get him to sleep with the both of them.
While Kyle and Troy start attending meetings with the campus ex-gay ministry, Marc notices Kyle becoming close with Troy and decides to try to seduce Troy himself. Troy eventually succumbs to Marc's advances during Gwen's homoerotic photo shoot, and the two fool around, but Marc cannot go through with it because he still has feelings for Kyle. Troy then overhears Gwen and Marc talking about the entire scheme.
Wanting to get back at the schemers, Troy visits Tiffani and Kyle because supposedly they have an "arrangement" that lets Kyle sleep with men. They attempt a threesome, but Troy gets his revenge by goading them into performing an uncomfortable act of cunnilingus first. Gwen and Marc storm into Kyle's house after witnessing the debacle, and Troy scolds the group for being so sex-crazy. Troy ultimately concludes that he is bisexual (to which everyone shouts out, "There's no such thing!", although they later accept it) and Kyle admits he was wrong to leave Marc.
The five then start scheming to out Jacob (Scott Vickaryous), the closeted leader of the ex-gay ministry, to his mother by tricking him to have sex with Octavio, another member of the ministry, in a portable toilet on wheels. Jacob finally comes out to his mother (after he inadvertently ejaculates on her coat as his sexuality is revealed), and flees with Octavio. Troy takes a liking to Tiffani and they start a relationship.
In the end, Marc and Kyle get back together after confessing their feelings to each other and start kissing. Gwen starts to date a girl experimentally.