Newly elected to Congress, former local television news reporter Evan Baxter (Steve Carell) leaves his hometown of Buffalo, New York and moves to the fictional town of Prestige Crest, Virginia, where his congressional campaign declares that he will change the world.
Evan prays to God (Morgan Freeman) to give him this opportunity.
His wife, Joan (Lauren Graham), prays that she, Evan, and their three sons (Jimmy Bennett, Graham Phillips, and Johnny Simmons) will be closer together as a family.
On the first day of his job at Congress, Evan is given a prime office space, where he is accompanied by his three congressional staffers, Rita, Marty, and Eugene (Wanda Sykes, John Michael Higgins, and Jonah Hill), and invited to co-sponsor the Public Land Act bill with his greedy boss, Chuck Long (John Goodman). Soon after Evan's arrival to Congress, six strange things start to happen around him:
The number 614 starts to appear everywhere he goes (i.e. alarm clock, gov't license plate, Rita's phone extension)
Ancient tools and gopher wood are delivered to his house that he actually did not order.
A man claiming to be God appears everywhere he goes.
Pairs of animals simply follow Evan without any apparent reason (with birds even flying into his office through the window).
Evan grows a beard no matter how many times he shaves.
Eight vacant lots in Prestige Crest are purchased in his name.
Evan soon learns that 614 refers to the verse in the Book of Genesis, where God instructs Noah to build an Ark in preparation for a flood.
God repeatedly appears in various guises before finally revealing himself to Evan, cordially insisting that he should build an Ark as well.
God explains to Evan that a flood is coming, and that the only opportunity Evan will have to change the world is by saving his community instead.
God also tells Evan to inform others about the flood should they ask him later.
Concerned about Evan's behaviour, Joan initially believes that he is having a mid-life crisis.
Evan begins constructing the Ark with his sons, who start to admire him as he is spending more time with them.
Animals eventually follow Evan to Congress.
When Long discovers this, he allows Evan latitude at first, but warns him that he will no longer tolerate it if it happens again in the future.
Meanwhile, Evan's staffers are outraged by his change in appearance and behavior.
When Evan returns to the Ark during construction, God presents him with a robe, and later tells him that the flood will likely come at midday on September 22.
When Joan becomes suspicious of his behavior, Evan tells her the truth: God has been talking to him and is responsible for his new looks and recent actions, but Joan does not believe Evan and is convinced that he is beginning to lose his mind.
After wearing the robe for some time, Evan finds it comfortable, but soon realizes that God will not allow him to take it off and wear anything else after two failed tries to change his clothes later.
The next time Evan arrives at Congress for work, animals follow him once again.
Once Evan finally explains his reason for this, his facial hair, and his robe, he is fired from Congress and removed from the Public Land Act bill.
Evan deduces that God purposely had him fired from Congress, so that he would have more time to build the Ark.
In continued skepticism, Joan leaves Evan alone and later moves to her mother's house with her sons, much to their reluctance.
Evan decides to build the Ark alone, gaining media attention and public ridicule, as hundreds of animals assemble in pairs.
Meanwhile, God appears to Joan as a waiter at a diner, wearing a name tag displaying "Al Mighty". In this guise, God listens to Joan as she expresses concern that Evan is only losing his sanity and allowing himself to become a laughingstock, though claiming that "God told him to do it". Sympathetic toward Evan, God tells Joan that perhaps it is an only opportunity for them, and explains that he himself does not give things but only the opportunity by which to obtain things, citing togetherness of families as one of these things.
Seeing God's meaning, Joan returns to Evan with new-found faith and help him and the animals finish the Ark together in order to prepare for the flood.
Meanwhile, word reaches Evan that Long has commissioned a dam and has cut corners in doing so, and that he will most likely do the same thing with his Public Land Act bill.
On September 22, Evan loads hundreds of animals onto the newly finished Ark in front of spectators and live news crews, who continue to mock him.
Later, Long and the policemen arrive with a wrecking ball crew and try to destroy the Ark, since it violates numerous building codes in Prestige Crest.
Minutes pass with no sign of rain, provoking spectator scorn.
A large rainstorm does come, but it is in brief.
Afterwards, Evan mentally connects Long's profiteering ethics and what God had already told him, and realizes that the dam under Long Lake is preparing to burst.
He persuades to all of the spectators, reporters, and policemen to board the Ark before disaster strikes.
When the dam bursts, Prestige Crest is completely destroyed and the Ark later rides the flood through the streets and landmarks of Washington, D.C.. The Ark reaches its final destination in front of the Capitol, which disrupts the vote on the Public Land Act bill.
Long becomes outraged that the flood did really happen.
Evan tells Long that the flood was caused by his poor design of the dam, which incites other Congressmen also present to turn against Long.
After Congress puts the Public Land Act bill on hold to investigate Long's profiteering ethics, and the animals returning to their natural habitat, Evan is reinstated as a congressman, and celebrates by finally shaving his beard, changing back into his regular clothes, and going on a long-promised hiking trip with his family.
When God reappears once again during the hike, Evan is initially disappointed when he realizes that he should never need to build the Ark again in the first place, since the flood only happened because of Long's defective dam.
However, God reassures Evan that he now has a perfect life as well as everything that he had originally prayed for, and that this would not have happened otherwise.
Evan is happy to realize this, as God informs him that the right way to change the world is by doing one Act of Random Kindness (ARK) at a time.
During the film's closing credits, God issues a new commandment to the outgoing audience: "Thou shalt do the dance", and later follow by the footage where the film's cast and crew members dance to "Gonna Make You Sweat (Everybody Dance Now)" by C+C Music Factory.