Freddy Krueger is trapped in Hell because the teenage residents of Springwood have forgotten about him, rendering him powerless.
Under the disguise of Jason Voorhees' mother, Freddy manipulates Jason into killing Springwood teenagers, hoping to inspire fear and restore his powers.
Lori Campbell now lives with her widowed father at 1428 Elm Street.
Her friends Kia, Gibb, Trey, and Blake, are spending the night there.
Jason kills Trey by stabbing him and folding him in half.
The murder's gruesomeness and the fact it happened in bed cause police to speculate Freddy was responsible.
Later, following a nightmare, Blake awakens to discover his beheaded father beside him before Jason appears and kills Blake.
The next day, the police say Blake committed the murders then committed suicide.
Lori's ex-boyfriend Will Rollins and his friend Mark Davis, the last people to have had contact with Freddy, are patients at Westin Hills Psychiatric Hospital, forced to take Hypnocil to suppress their dreams.
A news report of the murders prompts Mark to devise a successful escape plan.
He and Will return to Springwood, where Mark informs Lori and the others about Freddy.
Mark later learns of the city's plan to erase Freddy by making the population forget about him and realizes he may have ruined their plan.
That night, Lori and the others attend a rave at a cornfield.
A drunken Gibb believes she sees Trey and follows him to a silo that turns out to be a dream trap set by Freddy.
As Freddy is about to kill Gibb, Jason, who has arrived at the rave to slaughter partygoers, kills Gibb in the real world.
Freddy realizes Jason will not stop stealing his potential victims.
Linderman, a classmate with a crush on Lori, and stoner Freeburg escape the rave unharmed along with Lori, and Kia.
Lori confronts her father about her mother's death and traps him in a lie.
She and Will go to Mark's house, only to discover Freddy attacking Mark.
Deputy Stubbs suspects there is a copycat Jason murderer, but his suspicions fall on deaf ears.
He approaches Lori and her friends, who piece together Freddy's plan.
Learning of the Hypnocil, they steal a supply of it from Westin Hills.
But Freddy possesses Freeburg and disposes of the drugs.
After electrocuting Stubbs, Jason is tranquilized by the Freddy-possessed Freeburg, whom Jason cuts in half before succumbing to the drugs.
The teens devise a plan to pull Freddy from the dream world and force the two killers to battle each other.
They take the unconscious Jason to Crystal Lake; should he defeat Freddy there, he'll already be back home and will not come after the teens.
Meanwhile, Freddy battles Jason in the dream world.
Freddy has the advantage of his dream powers but even here, Jason seems indestructible.
However upon discovering Jason's fear of water, he uses it to pull him into a nightmare of his drowning as a child.
Lori enters the dream world to retrieve Freddy, saving Jason in the process.
Enraged, Freddy attacks Lori, and reveals he was the one who killed her mother.
In the real world, Jason awakens and chases the others into a cabin.
Linderman is mortally wounded.
The cabin catches fire, and Lori's hand is dragged through flames, causing her to wake up and pull Freddy from her dream into the real world.
Jason begins to fight Freddy while the others escape, and throws Freddy through the roof of another cabin.
Linderman dies, and Lori, Will and Kia encounter Freddy.
Kia taunts him, but Jason kills her.
As Lori and Will escape, the two monsters begin their final battle.
An attempt to ram a mine cart into Jason goes wrong and both of them are hit and land on the boardwalk.
Lori and Will igniting propane tanks that blow Freddy and Jason into the lake.
Freddy makes one final attempt to kill Lori and Will; however, Jason saves them by using Freddy's own arm to impale him through the chest, before falling back into the lake.
Lori decapitates Freddy while Jason sinks below the water.
Finally at peace with their past, Lori and Will leave Crystal Lake together.
Later, Jason emerges from the lake holding the severed head of Freddy, which winks at the audience.