Two years after Box Network executives canceled Planet Express' contract, the executives are fired and Planet Express is back "on the air." As the crew celebrates, Hermes is decapitated, causing his wife LaBarbara to leave him.
His head is placed in a jar while his body is repaired.
Lars, the man who performs the procedure, flirts with Leela, much to Fry's chagrin.
During a delivery to a nude beach planet, Bender discovers a tattoo of himself on Fry's butt.
A trio of scammer aliens (Nudar, Fleb and Schlump) dupe the crew into providing their personal information, allowing them to seize control of Planet Express and infect Bender with an obedience virus.
The scammers then discover that Fry's tattoo has a code that allows time travel, but only into the past.
Nibbler tries to warn the scammers against using the code, but is ignored.

The scammers have Bender use the code to steal valuable objects from Earth's past, storing them in a cave beneath the ship.
Hermes also has Bender retrieve an earlier version of his body so he can win back his wife.
Meanwhile, Leela and Lars date, further depressing Fry.
Once the scammers have history's treasures, they decide to get rid of the time code by killing Fry.
Fry uses the code to escape to January 1, 2000, just after he was frozen.
The scammers send Bender after him.
Bender arrives before Fry, creating a duplicate of himself when he has to use the bathroom.
Another Bender from "way at the end" then appears, opens Fry's cryogenic tube and puts the tattoo on his butt.
When Fry arrives, the first duplicate inadvertently initiates a self-destruct sequence as a result of not going to the bathroom.
Fry shoves that Bender into another tube, then escapes.
The original Bender spends the next twelve years hunting Fry, destroying Fry's apartment when he walks inside.
Bender reports his success to the scammers, who then erase the time code and the virus.
The crew holds a memorial for Fry, but he suddenly shows up.
Fry says he created a duplicate of himself, which remained in the past while he accidentally fell into his own cryo-tube.
When Fry (plus the Fry that was originally frozen) awoke 1,000 years later, the present Fry froze himself until the current year.
Meanwhile, the Fry in 2000 spent the years before Bender's attack working at Panucci's Pizzeria, then at an aquarium caring for Leelu, an orphaned narwhal.
He also hung out with his family and tended to his beloved dog Seymour Asses.

Nibbler removes the tattoo from Fry to keep the scammers from further abusing it.
Leela and Lars decide to marry, but during the wedding Hermes is again decapitated.
Professor Farnsworth says that Hermes' body would have died anyway since time paradox duplicates are doomed to die prematurely.
Hearing this, Lars panics and cancels the wedding.
The scammers then trick Earth President Richard Nixon into giving Earth to them.
Exiled to Neptune, the population assembles a fleet with the aid of Robot Santa, Kwanzaabot, and the Hanukah Zombie.
Hermes has his bureaucratic brain wired into the ship's battle computer, allowing him to destroy the scammers' fleet and win back his wife.
Meanwhile, Leela uses a doomsday device that Bender had originally stolen for the scammers (then stolen back for himself) to destroy the scammers' ship.
Unable to console a heartbroken Leela, Fry arranges for her to meet with Lars at the cryogenic lab.
Having survived the doomsday blast, Nudar ambushes them.
Lars tricks Nudar into approaching the Bender duplicate on auto-destruct and holds him against the duplicate, who explodes, killing the three of them.
The explosion singes off some of Lars' clothing, revealing the Bender tattoo.
During Lars' funeral, the Planet Express crew learns that Lars was actually the time-paradox duplicate of Fry, who had survived Bender's attack in 2012; the fire and smoke changed his appearance and voice.
The duplicate Fry froze himself to return to the future and be with Leela.
However, when he learned that time travel paradoxes were doomed, he canceled the wedding to spare Leela the pain of his inevitable death.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Leela forgives Lars and reconciles with Fry.
=======
Leela forgives “Lars” and reconciles with Fry.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Bender removes Lars's tattoo and travels to 2000 to place it on Fry in the cryogenic tube so that the events that transpired "make any sense at all." Upon returning, Bender emerges with all the duplicates from his stealing sprees.
Terrified of the paradoxical consequences, Nibbler urges everyone to evacuate the universe before swallowing himself.
The Bender duplicates explode and cause a tear in the fabric of space.