Lexy Gold (Lindsay Lohan) lives amongst the wealthy and elite of Manhattan, New York.
Clad in Prada, she prides herself on her ability to get the scoop and serve it up in her school newspaper's gossip column.
She competes for status on the newspaper with Jack Downey (Bug Hall), the editor (who has a crush on Lexy as shown throughout the whole movie). When a photograph Lexy has taken of her teacher, Mr.
Orlando Walker (Ian Gomez), is published in the city's daily paper, he goes missing and his car is found in the East River.
With help from Lexy's best friend Jen (Brenda Song) and one of her schoolmates Gabe (Ali Mukaddam), Lexy and Jack set out to solve the mystery behind the disappearance.
Their teacher, Miss Gertrude Dawson (Amanda Plummer), becomes involved as she and Mr.
Walker were having an affair.
Jack receives a message from Mr.
Walker about a scholarship.
Lexy and Jack search his old apartment, where they run into Detective Charles Meany (Charles Shaughnessy), who is searching for Mr.
Walker.
Jenn and Gabe watch Miss Dawson at Gabe's house with a video camera to keep an eye on her.
Lexy and Jack later meet Mrs.
Petrossian (Sylvia Lennick), who is Mr.
Walker's mother, at her house.
They discover that Mr.
Walker changed his identity after being accused of stealing $10,000,000.
Mr. Walker later receives a letter from the real person who stole the money, framing Mr.
Walker.
The group and Mr.
Walker meet at a hotel to pretend to receive the money.
Miss Dawson shows up at the hotel and is taken hostage by the real thief.
Lexy and Jack search the halls for the man, who is revealed to be Detective Meany, whose real name is Falco Grandville, Mr.
Walker's boss when he worked at a bank in Arizona, and the man who had framed Mr.
Walker for the money theft.
The team catch up with him and he is later arrested.
It's later revealed Mr.
Walker's mother found a brouch worth the money at Falco's office by chance and decided to keep it; Falco blamed Walker.
After Mr.
Walker is pronounced a free man at last, he later asks Miss Dawson to marry him.
At the end it shows the wedding with Jack, Lexy, Jen, and Gabe.
Jack and Lexy share a moment between them before the four teens walk down the street talking about going bowling.