Owen Baker (Liam Aiken) is a 12-year-old who has been working as the neighborhood dog-walker so he can earn the privilege of getting a dog of his own.
Owen's hard work pays off when his parents, Mr.
and Mrs.
Baker (Kevin Nealon and Molly Shannon), let Owen adopt a scruffy Border Terrier that he names Hubble (voice of Matthew Broderick). Owen has little time to make lasting friends, so he hopes Hubble will be his best friend.
Owen does have a friend named Connie Flemming (Brittany Moldowan), a girl his age who lives in the neighborhood.
But that won't be for long if Owen's parents continue their trend of buying and selling houses.
Owen and Hubble get more than they bargained for when after the incident which involves Owen realising that Hubble is a dog from outer space.
When Owen wakes up next morning to discover that he can understand every word Hubble saysincluding the ominous phrase: "Take me to your leaders."
Owen learns that dogs came to Earth thousands of years ago to colonize and dominate the planet.
Hubble, who is really named Canid 3942, has been sent by the powerful Greater Dane (voice of Vanessa Redgrave) on a mission from the Dog Star Sirius 7 to make sure dogs have fulfilled this destiny.
The dogs Owen walks include pampered Poodle Barbara Ann (voiced by Delta Burke), cool Boxer Wilson (voiced by Donald Faison), nervous Italian Greyhound Nelly (voiced by Brittany Murphy) and gassy Bernese Mountain Dog Shep (voiced by Carl Reiner).
Despite the best efforts of Owen and this rag-tag group of neighborhood dogs to convince Hubble that everything is fine with Earth's dogs, Hubble soon discovers the awful truth about Earth dogs: "You're all pets!" Things get worse when Hubble learns that the Greater Dane is headed for Earth to do her own inspection.
If things don't look right, all dogs on Earth will be recalled to Sirius 7.
Owen and Hubble have to work together to prepare the neighborhood dogs for a visit from the Greater Dane and her Chinese Crested henchman (voiced by Cheech Marin). Owen, Hubble, Connie, and their canine pals set out to whip the other dogs into shape so that they can pass muster.
Owen's efforts fail and the Greater Dane recalls all dogs from Earth.
Upset, Owen repairs Hubble's communicator and sends him a message declaring how much he loves him.
The Greater Dane hears the message and is left curious by it so she approaches Hubble for his opinion on why the dogs on Earth are subservient to humanity when they should be ruling it.
Hubble believes that the dogs and humans have formed a bond of love and loyalty and when asked where his loyalty lies, Hubble asks the Greater Dane to refer to him as Hubble rather than Canid 3942, showing his loyalty is now to Owen.
As a result, the Greater Dane sends the Earth dogs back and declares them a separate species.
Hubble is allowed to return as well, but on the condition that he removes Owen's ability to communicate with dogs.
Owen's parents choose to remain in town for once and Hubble starts to fit in as an Earth dog.