Harry spends another miserable summer with his only remaining family, the Dursleys.
During a dinner party given by Harry's aunt and uncle, Dobby, a house-elf, pops into Harry's bedroom, warning him that if he returns to Hogwarts, terrible things will happen.
Harry ignores it, and to ensure that he will not return to Hogwarts, Dobby wreaks havoc in the kitchen, infuriating the Dursleys, who angrily imprison Harry.
Harry is rescued by his friend Ron Weasley and brothers Fred and George in their parents' flying car, spending the summer at the Weasley home.
After travelling via floo powder for the first time, Harry accidentally ends up in Knockturn Alley, the dark arts section of Diagon Alley.
Fortunately, he encounters his friend Hagrid, Hogwarts' gamekeeper, there to buy flesh-eating slug repellent, who guides him safely back into Diagon Alley to shop for school supplies.
In the company of the Weasleys and his other best friend Hermione Granger, Harry encounters Gilderoy Lockhart, a self-centered and fame-seeking wizard famous for dealing with numerous dark creatures, who is revealed to be the new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts.
Shortly after the encounter with Lockhart, the group get into a confrontation with Harry's nemesis Draco Malfoy and his father Lucius.
<<<<<<< HEAD
At the start of the Hogwarts year, the Weasleys depart with Harry for King's Cross, but when they arrive, Harry and Ron inexplicably cannot get through the secret entrance to Platform 9 , so they decide to fly to Hogwarts in the Weasley's car instead.
=======
At the start of the Hogwarts year, the Weasleys depart with Harry for King's Cross, but when they arrive, Harry and Ron inexplicably cannot get through the secret entrance to Platform 9 ¾, so they decide to fly to Hogwarts in the Weasley's car instead.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Things get dangerous when Ron loses control of the car, and causes it to fall from the sky into a Whomping Willow, a tree that attacks anyone who approaches it.
Ron and Harry escape from the tree, but Ron's wand is broken in the process, and the car, revealing itself to possess a degree of sentience, drives off into the Forbidden Forest.
They then report to Professor McGonagall's office and they receive a detention.
The next day, Ron receives a Howler from his mother, Molly Weasley, threatening to send him home if he puts another toe out of line.
Lockhart turns out to be an incompetent teacher, more concerned with personal celebrity than teaching.
Whilst serving his detention with Lockhart, Harry hears strange voices that only he can hear.
On Halloween, Mrs.
Norris, a cat belonging to the school caretaker's is found petrified.
On a wall nearby appears a message: "The Chamber of Secrets has been opened.
Enemies of the heir, beware." Harry, Ron, and their best friend Hermione Granger discover that one of Hogwarts' founders, Salazar Slytherin, secretly built the Chamber of Secrets, which is rumoured to contain a monster that only Slytherin's heir can directly control.
Slytherin disapproved of wizards and witches with Muggle parents (muggleborns) being allowed to attend Hogwarts and supposedly built the Chamber so that one day his heir could purge the school of them.

Suspecting that Harry's nemesis, Draco Malfoy, is the heir of Slytherin, the trio spends a month making Polyjuice Potion, a brew that will allow them, for a period, to look like someone else.
Their makeshift laboratory is in a bathroom haunted by the ghost of Moaning Myrtle.
During a game of Quidditch, Harry's arm is broken by a rogue Bludger.
Lockhart volunteers to heal the broken bones but removes them instead.
That night, as Harry lies in his hospital bed, Dobby appears and admits responsibility for the platform incident and the rogue Bludger, out of a desire to prevent Harry from being able to attend Hogwarts.
He begs Harry to leave Hogwarts, insisting that he is in danger, and lets slip that the Chamber of Secrets has been opened before.
Soon after, a first-year student, Colin Creevey, is attacked after sneaking to visit Harry and petrified.
During the first meeting of Lockhart's new dueling club, Harry duels Draco, who casts a snake that tries to attack a student, Justin Finch-Fletchley.
In his efforts to stop it, Harry unwittingly speaks Parseltongue.
<<<<<<< HEAD
The sudden appearance of this abilityalso possessed by Salazar Slytherinshocks everyone, since it suggests that Harry might be Slytherin's heir.
=======
The sudden appearance of this ability—also possessed by Salazar Slytherin—shocks everyone, since it suggests that Harry might be Slytherin's heir.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Harry comes under further suspicion when he stumbles upon the petrified bodies of Justin Finch-Fletchley and Nearly Headless Nick.
At Christmas, Harry and Ron, who stay at Hogwarts use the finished Polyjuice Potion to disguise themselves as Draco's two friends Crabbe and Goyle.
Hermione is unable to join them, as her polyjuice potion made her resemble a different form.
Speaking with Draco in the Slytherin common room, Harry and Ron discover that Draco is not the Heir of Slytherin and that the Chamber was last opened fifty years before.
After a few quiet months, Harry finds a diary in Myrtle's bathroom, which has flooded.
He writes in the diary, after frustrating attempts to find out if the diary keeps anything, which responds by displaying the name "Tom Riddle." Communicating with "Riddle" by writing in the diary, Harry discovers that a close friend of Tom was found to handle opening the Chamber of Secrets fifty years ago.
Some time later, Harry's dorm is raided, and the diary is stolen.
Hermione and a Ravenclaw girl, Penelope Clearwater, are petrified shortly afterwards.
Harry and Ron intend to interrogate Hagrid, but before they can, he is accused of opening the Chamber of Secrets again and is taken to Azkaban prison.
Before Hagrid is led away, he indirectly instructs the two to "follow the spiders". There they encounter Aragog, a giant spider whom Hagrid had raised in secret during his days at Hogwarts, who informs them the monster who killed the girl 50 years before was not a spider, that the girl's body was found in a bathroom, and that Hagrid is innocent.
The boys escape a colony of giant spiders, who are instructed by Aragog to eat them.
They also discover that the girl Aragog referred to was probably Moaning Myrtle.

Harry and Ron discover from a piece of paper Hermione was holding when she was attacked that the monster is a Basilisk, a giant snake that kills those who look it in the eye, although the petrified victims only ever saw it in a reflection or through a medium.
They later discover that the Basilisk has been using Hogwarts plumbing system to traverse, and that the entrance to the Chamber is in Myrtle's bathroom, which Harry opens by speaking Parseltongue.
They have brought with them Lockhart, whom they have caught as he was attempting to flee Hogwarts, after he is asked by his colleagues to find the creature.
He steals Ron's wand and attempts a memory charm on them, revealing that he is a fraud whose "great accomplishments" were stories he stole from other wizards whose memories he then erased.
He admits that the memory charm is the only one that he can do right.
As he attempts to erase their memories, Ron's broken wand reflects the spell back at Lockhart, knocking him down and erasing all of Lockhart's memory.
Harry is forced to continue by himself after the spell causes a cave-in.
Inside the chamber, Harry finds the unconscious body of Ron's sister Ginny, who is the final victim of the basilisk, as well as the almost physical form of Riddle who reveals that Ginny had been communicating with him by writing in his diary, allowing him to possess her and have her set the Basilisk on the Muggleborns.
Ginny had realised that the diary was not what it seemed and tried to dispose of it in Myrtle's bathroom, but stole it back when she saw Harry with it, afraid that her crimes would be revealed.
Riddle then forced Ginny to enter the Chamber, to lure Harry down there, and, by possessing Ginny's soul, began to take physical form.
Riddle reveals that his name, Tom Marvolo Riddle, is an anagram for I am Lord Voldemort and that he is Voldemort's past self.
Riddle then summons the Basilisk and orders it to attack Harry.
Just when it seems Harry will be killed, Fawkes, Dumbledore's pet phoenix, appears and blinds the Basilisk.
Fawkes carries the Sorting Hat, from which Harry draws a sword and kills the Basilisk, however is injured in the process by a rogue fang.
Healed by Fawkes's tears, Harry stabs the diary with a Basilisk fang, defeating Riddle and saving Ginny.
The two return with Ron and Lockhart to the school, where Ginny is joyfully reunited with her parents, and Harry and Ron are commended by Dumbledore.
In the aftermath, Harry accuses the school governor, Lucius Malfoy (Draco's father), of putting the journal in Ginny's cauldron in the first place, and later tricks him into freeing his house-elf.
Malfoy is sacked as governor, the final examinations are cancelled, and Lockhart is admitted to the hospital.