Police Constable Nicholas Angel, a high-achieving member of the Metropolitan Police Service, is promoted to Sergeant. However, he is transferred to the village of Sandford, Gloucestershire, for making his colleagues look bad by comparison.
The village is generally devoid of any crime, with its local Neighbourhood Watch Alliance (NWA) helping to keep the peace. To Nick's frustration, the local police force has become lazy and complacent. He meets police officer Danny Butterman, the son of town chief Inspector Frank Butterman. Danny is assigned as Nick's new partner, and constantly discusses his love for action and buddy cop films.
Nick and Danny attend a rendition of "Romeo and Juliet", with its leading roles played by Martin Blower and Eve Draper. After everyone leaves, Blower and Draper are killed by a cloaked figure. The next morning, they are found decapitated in Blower's convertible. Nick suspects foul play, but everyone else passes it off as an accident. Nick is called to solve a neighborhood argument, and discovers and confiscates a large stash of unlicensed firearms in an elderly man's shed.
Danny invites Nick to a drink at the local bar, where Nick begins to open up and discusses how he cannot stop thinking of work. They meet Skinner, the local supermarket manager, and George Merchant, who made a fortune selling kitchen goods. Danny takes Nick home and the two binge-watch several action movies. Meanwhile, an unseen person causes a gas explosion which destroys Merchant's large mansion, killing him. The incident is, again, deemed an accident and Nick is ridiculed for thinking otherwise.
At the local fair, Tim Messenger, editor and journalist at The Sandford Citizen newspaper, approaches Nick, claims to have information regarding Merchant and requests to meet him alone at the churchyard. An unseen person pushes a church spire onto Messenger's head, killing him. Nick angrily declares the incident to be a murder, and this time even Inspector Butterman chastises him. Nick reads through the copies of The Sandford Citizen and discovers a link between the victims.
Nick stops at the flower shop of Miss Tiller, and learns that she intends to sell her shop and move to the city. As he is distracted, Tiller is murdered by a cloaked figure. Nick gives chase but fails to catch the murderer. Piecing together what he knows, he accuses Simon Skinner of the murders. However, Skinner's alibi is backed up by video footage. Angel considers the possibility of more than one killer being involved, but Inspector Butterman shoots down his idea.
As Nick returns home, he is attacked by Michael, Skinner's supermarket employee. Nick subdues Michael, then discovers the NWA's meeting location. Nick confronts the NWA and tries to arrest them. They claim responsibilities for the murders, and the motive is simply that the victims are deemed a threat for Sandford's chance of winning "Village of the Year". After Frank Butterman reveals himself to be the leader, Nick flees and discovers the bodies of many victims. As Nick is cornered, Danny appears and stabs him, then drives him out of town. It is revealed that he only faked Nick's murder. Danny begs Nick to leave Sandford for his own safety.
At a gas station, Nick is inspired by the action movies he watched with Danny, and returns to Sandford. He arms himself with the confiscated firearms and reunites with Danny. After several firefights with NWA members, the two rally their fellow colleagues and besiege the supermarket, forcing Skinner to flee with Frank. Nick and Danny give chase, and catches up when Skinner crashes his car. Nick subdues Skinner, and Frank flees in Nick's car, but crashes when he is attacked by the runaway swan.
Nick's former superiors beg him to come back to London, as crime rate has risen in his absence, but Nick remains in Sandford. As the police officers process the paperwork, Tom Weaver, the last NWA member, bursts into the station and attempts to kill Nick. Danny dives in and takes a bullet for Nick, and Weaver accidentally activates the confiscated sea mine, which destroys the station but kills no one. One year later, Angel and Danny are in charge of the Sandford Police as Inspector and Sergeant, respectively.