A US Army librarian, Corporal "Average Joe" Bauers, and a prostitute, Rita, are selected for a suspended animation experiment on grounds of average appearance, intelligence, behavior, etc. Rita's pimp "Upgrayedd" has been bribed to allow her to take part. The experiment is forgotten when the officer in charge is arrested for having started his own prostitution ring under Upgrayedd's tutelage. Five hundred years later, Joe and Rita's suspension chambers are unearthed by the collapse of a mountain-sized garbage pile, and Joe's suspension chamber breaks through the wall of Frito Pendejo's apartment, whose occupant expels him.
Joe, suspecting hallucination, enters a hospital. The former Washington, D.C. has lost most of its infrastructure, with people living in plastic huts called "domistile". The human population has become morbidly stupid, speak only low registers of English competently, are profoundly anti-intellectual, and are named after corporate products. When Joe is arrested for not having a bar code tattoo to pay for his doctor's appointment, he realizes the current year and society's state. At Joe's trial, Frito, acting as his (grossly incompetent) lawyer, causes him to be sent to prison. Rita returns to her former profession.
Joe is renamed "Not Sure" by a faulty tattooing machine, and takes an IQ test before escaping. Once free, Joe asks Frito whether a time machine exists to return himself to 2005, and Frito agrees to bring him to the one about which he knows, after Joe promises to open a bank account under Frito's name in Joe's time, which will be worth billions by 2505. On the way, Joe reunites with Rita, and the three arrive at a gigantic Costco store, where a tattoo scanner identifies Joe as a fugitive. He is taken to the White House, where he is appointed Secretary of the Interior, on the grounds that his IQ test identified him as the most intelligent man alive.
In a speech, President Camacho gives Joe the job of fixing the nation's food shortages, dust bowls, and crippled economy within a week; whereafter Joe discovers that the nation's crops are irrigated with a sports drink named "Brawndo", whose parent corporation had purchased the FDA, FCC, and USDA. When Joe has it replaced with water, Brawndo's stock drops to zero, and half of the population lose their jobs, causing mass riots. Joe is sentenced to die in a monster truck demolition derby featuring undefeated "Rehabilitation Officer" Beef Supreme. Frito and Rita discover that Joe's reintroduction of water to the soil has prompted vegetation in the fields. Frito shows the crops on the stadium's display screen, and Camacho gives Joe a full pardon, appointing him Vice President, choosing to not use the time machine. Joe and Rita find that the time machine Frito is merely an inaccurate, history-themed amusement ride. Following Camacho's term, Joe is elected President. Joe and Rita marry and conceive the world's three smartest children, while Frito, now Vice President, takes eight wives and fathers 32 of the world's stupidest children.
In a post-credits scene, a third suspension chamber releases Upgrayedd, who is intent on tracking Rita down.