The quiet suburb of New Salem is being terrorized by a serial killer who abducts and tortures young women, holding them captive for weeks before murdering them.
Aubrey Fleming (Lindsay Lohan), a pianist and aspiring writer, appears to be his latest victim when she disappears during a night out with her friends.
She is later seen bound and gagged on an operating table as her hands are exposed to dry ice.
As the days tick by, the special FBI Task Force convened to track the killer begins to lose hope of finding him before it's too late.
Late one night, a driver discovers a young woman by the side of a deserted road, disheveled and critically injured.
The girl is rushed to the hospital, where Aubrey’s distraught parents, Susan (Julia Ormond) and Daniel (Neal McDonough), wait by her side as she slips in and out of consciousness.
When she is finally able to speak, she shocks everyone by claiming to be a down-on-her luck stripper named Dakota Moss, who has never heard of Aubrey Fleming.
Convinced Aubrey is suffering from post traumatic stress disorder, her doctors, parents, and law enforcement officials can only wait for rest and therapy to restore her memory.
But after returning to her parents’ suburban home, she continues to insist she is not who they think she is, despite bearing bizarre wounds identical to those of the serial killer's previous victims, which include her hand and half of her leg cut off.
An FBI psychologist believes Dakota to be a delusional persona of Aubrey, and the agents speculate the persona is to distance and protect Aubrey from the events that happened.
Examining Aubrey's laptop, they discover a short story about a girl with an alter ego named Dakota.
In addition, a DNA test confirms that Dakota is Aubrey.
Unaware of this, Dakota explains away her injuries as various events that happened before she arrived in town.
She begins to suspect she may be Aubrey's identical twin sister, and comes to believe her injuries are sympathetic resonance with her twin's wounds, in a stigmata-like fashion.
However, Susan shows Dakota a video of her pregnancy ultrasound clearly revealing there was only one fetus in her womb.
Dakota then confronts Daniel and asserts Susan's child died shortly after birth, and that Daniel took Aubrey from Virginia Sue Moss (another character from Aubrey's short story), a crack addict and leaving her with Dakota to raise alone.
Confused and terrified, Dakota starts seeing visions of a menacing figure slowly butchering his captive.
One of these visions take Dakota to a nearby cemetery.
After investigating the grave of Aubrey's recently murdered friend, Jennifer Toland (Stacy Lynn Gabel), Dakota finds a blue ribbon from a piano competition, with a message from Jennifer's (and Aubrey's) piano teacher, Douglas Norquist (Thomas Tofel). She is followed by Daniel, and declares "I know who killed me".
The two go, without FBI backup, to Norquist's home to confront him.
Daniel heads into Norquist's house alone leaving a panicking Dakota in the car alone.
Attempting to calm herself, Dakota refers to herself as Aubrey.
Daniel is seemingly overpowered, and it is implied killed, by Norquist.
Dakota, having enters the house, attacks Norquist in self defense and cuts his hand off before being overpowered and tied up.
Confused, Norquist asks why she has returned and exclaimed he had buried her (referencing an earlier vision Dakota had). Freeing herself, Dakota kills Norquist and heads into the nearby wood finding where Norquist had buried Aubrey alive.
Having freed Aubrey, seemingly verifying Dakota's version of events, Dakota lays on the ground next to her.
The movie ends without resolution, leaving it open to interpretation if Dakota and her version of events were the real narrative or if Dakota was an unreliable narrator; an aspect of Aubrey's imagination either as part of her short story for school, an alternative personality to deal with trauma she had suffered, or an imaginative attempt by her to solve who had kidnapped her and that she had never escaped in the first place (as evidenced by Dakota's random an unexplained pain and bleeding).