After a mysterious shot of a body floating in Loch Ness (reprised near the end), Incident at Loch Ness flashes back to the beginning of a documentary called Herzog In Wonderland being directed by John Bailey with an overview of Herzog's work as he himself begins work for a separate documentary to be called Enigma of Loch Ness, in which he is exploring the Loch Ness Monster myth.
Throughout the film, Herzog asserts the Loch Ness Monster is merely a creation of a collective psychological need in society.
As the film continues, Herzog hosts a dinner party to kick off film production.
In attendance are his wife (Lena Herzog), several Hollywood celebrities (Jeff Goldblum, Ricky Jay), and the film's crew.
Difficulties begin to arise as the untested producer, Zak Penn, attempts to transform Herzog's film into a high-grossing blockbuster.
In this attempt, Penn commits several Hollywood clichés such as hiring a beautiful woman (Kitana Baker) for a dubious role as a sonar operator and a self-deluded cryptozoologist (Michael Karnow) for comic relief.
As the shooting progresses, the tension between Herzog and Penn escalates with each revelation that Penn is acting in an underhanded manner.
First, it becomes quite apparent the producer has commissioned a fake "Nessie" to be used.
Then both Kitana and Karnow are revealed to be actors hired by Penn.
In a twist of events, when Herzog and his crew are working on their film, the crew begins to see what appears to truly be the Loch Ness Monster.
Herzog and crew become more and more concerned as first the boat's motor fails and then the "monster" appears to be attacking the vessel in a deepening fog.
The crew huddles below decks until the monster returns again to ram the boat hard enough to cause it to begin to sink.
Karnow is thrown overboard during another attack, "Nessie" now clearly visible to the crew.
Karnow is lost in the fog and presumably eaten by the monster.
After Penn and the assistant director (AD), Robert O'Meara, sneak away in the liferaft, Herzog decides to put on the ship's sole wetsuit and swim to shore for help.
Before he can do so, however, "Nessie" returns to finally sink the ship.
While holding a camera in a water-resistant housing, Herzog captures underwater images of a large creature passing him in the murky, dark water.
The next day, Penn is found by vacationers on holiday and leads them back to recover all but O'Meara and Karnow, who are presumed dead.
At this point, it appears that both the documentary film we have been watching and the documentary film we were watching Herzog make could be fictitious.
However, this never becomes completely obvious, and the film ends without making it clear exactly who is duping whom.