Chuck Levine, a womanizing bachelor, and Larry Valentine, a widower struggling to raise his two children, are two veteran New York City firefighters. During a routine sweep of a burned building, a segment of floor collapses on Chuck. Larry quickly shields him from the falling debris, saving his life. Later, he and Chuck wake up in a hospital, where Chuck vows to repay Larry in any way possible. This incident serves as a catalyst for Larry's epiphany: death is both inevitable and unpredictable. This prompts him to significantly increase his life insurance policy, but he runs into difficulties naming his children as primary beneficiaries. He is told he should remarry so his new spouse can be the primary beneficiary; however, no one specifies who he has to marry.
Inspired by a newspaper article about domestic partnerships, Larry asks Chuck to enter a civil union with him. Although Chuck declines at first, he is reminded of his debt to Larry and finally agrees, entering a domestic partnership and becoming Larry's primary beneficiary in the event of his death. To their dismay, however, New York City investigators soon arrive to inquire about their abrupt partnership, suspecting fraud. Chuck and Larry decide to enlist the help of lawyer Alex McDonough, who suggests they get married and move in together to prove they're committed; Chuck reluctantly agrees. The pair soon travel to Canada for a quick marriage (so quick that they use a nearby homeless person as the best man) and begin living together.
At a gay benefit costume party, the partygoers are confronted by homophobic protesters, whose leader, a minister named Jim, calls Chuck a "faggot." Chuck punches him, and the incident is picked up by the local news. With their apparent homosexuality and marriage revealed, the pair come under fire. Chuck and Larry are heckled, and their fellow FDNY firefighters refuse to work or even play basketball alongside them. Their only ally is Fred G. Duncan, an angry, intimidating firefighter who comes out to a very surprised Chuck.
Larry's effeminate son, Eric, is harassed in school by a homophobic bully, but he surprises everybody by easily winning a fight with his abuser. During the ordeal, the previously homophobic pair come to understand what it's like to be persecuted and become more accepting of homosexuality.
Chuck becomes romantically interested in Alex after the two spend time together, but finds himself unable to get close to her because she thinks he is gay. Meanwhile, city agent Clinton Fitzer arrives to investigate the couple. The strain on both Larry and Chuck leads to a verbal fight, and the two are assigned to work different shifts. In the meantime, a petition circulates to have Chuck and Larry thrown out of the firehouse. Larry discovers the petition, prompting him to confront the crew about personal embarrassments on the job that Chuck and Larry helped them overcome. After the confrontation, an emergency call comes into the fire station, and as they prepare to address the call, Larry reminds his co-workers that as a result of their harassment, he is no longer on duty. After Larry's shift is over, Chuck and Larry reconcile their differences.
Chuck and Alex's relationship grows as they spend time together, and they soon kiss. The kiss shocks Alex because she still believes Chuck is gay and married, making the interaction unacceptable from her point of view. Chuck tries to explain the situation, and Alex kisses him again but tells him they cannot see each other outside of their lawyer-client relationship. Alex says she believes in marriage and what it represents, and that she has betrayed both him and Larry. Chuck tries to explain but is unable to reveal the truth. Alex tells him to go, and he has no choice but to do so. Soon after, Fitzer learns from Larry's children that Chuck has been spending time with Alex, whom he frequently talks about whenever Larry is not around. Fitzer appears shocked by this revelation.
Larry learns about the kiss and confronts Chuck about the amount of time he spends with Alex, asserting that Chuck's absence is jeopardizing their ability to maintain the ruse of their relationship. Soon, Chuck and Larry begin to argue. Chuck is infuriated that he must live a lie to fulfill his promise to Larry, especially because it prevents him from having the intimacy he wants with Alex. Hurt, Larry asks why Chuck could not have fun with him. Chuck accuses Larry of changing since they married and of not acting like a husband, and says Chuck feels like he is unable to breathe. Larry tries to reason with Chuck, saying he feels that way only because he is afraid of being trapped by the marriage. Chuck aggressively reminds Larry that their marriage is a sham and declares it a nightmare. Larry disparages Chuck's ability to commit to anything and his willingness to try to make the marriage work. Chuck then tells Larry to face the fact that they are not supposed to be together and that Larry needs to find a real relationship instead of being jealous about Chuck's relationship with Alex. In response, Larry reveals that he is still in love with his deceased wife, Paula, to which Chuck responds that it's time for Larry to move on for the sake of his kids. Despite the severity of the argument, Larry and Chuck soon reconcile their differences again.
The marriage soon comes under fire as numerous women publicly testify to having slept with Chuck in the recent past, and the couple is called into court to defend their marriage against charges of fraud. They are defended by Alex, and their fellow firefighters arrive in support, having realized all that Chuck and Larry have done for them over the years. Fitzer interrogates both men, who testify that they genuinely love each other (albeit in a platonic fashion). As his final demand, Fitzer asks the pair to kiss to prove that their relationship is physical. Before they do so, Chuck and Larry are interrupted by FDNY Captain Phineas J. Tucker, who finally reveals that their marriage is a sham and that they are both straight. Tucker tries to save Chuck and Larry by saying he will have to be arrested as well, since he knew about the falsity but failed to report it. This prompts each of the other firefighters to claim a role in the wedding in a show of solidarity. Chuck, Larry, and the other firefighters are sent to jail, but they are quickly released after negotiating a deal to provide photos for an AIDS research benefit calendar. The deal includes pleading guilty to fraud, which reduces the charges to a misdemeanor. Chuck and Larry keep their benefits.
Two months later, Duncan and Alex's brother, Kevin, are married in Canada at the same chapel as Chuck and Larry. At the wedding party, Larry finally moves on from the death of his wife and talks to a new woman, while Alex tentatively agrees to a dance with Chuck. The film ends with Lance Bass singing and little Eric tap-dancing.