Three days after the events of the first film, a young boy named Billy Taggart assists his father in erecting scarecrows throughout a corn field, when one of the scarecrows suddenly comes to life and attacks him.
As his father, Jack Taggart Sr., and his older brother, Jack Jr., rush to his aid, the scarecrow drags Billy through the field before sprouting wings and flying off, leaving the Taggart family horrified.
The following day (Day 23), a school bus carrying a high school basketball team and cheerleaders suffers a blowout.
The chaperones inspect the tire, which they discover has been torn apart by a hand-crafted shuriken made of bone fragments.
Back on the Taggart farm, Jack Jr.
finds a dagger left by the Creeper.
When his father inspects it, it inexplicably flies out of his hand on its own accord.
With the bus back on the road, Minxie has a vision of Darry Jenner, the Creeper's victim from the first film, and Billy Taggart, who attempt to warn her about the Creeper.
She then witnesses the Creeper blow out another tire with another shuriken, leaving them stranded on the road.
They flag down a passing car, whose occupants promise to notify the authorities.
After The Creeper kills the chaperones, Scott argues with Deaundre Davis about whether or not they should leave the bus.
After the Creeper returns and jams the doors, Minxie has another vision in which Darry explains that every 23rd spring for 23 days the Creeper eats people before going back into hibernation.
Minxie informs the others that its last visit was purely to pick out who it wanted.
After hearing police reports, the Taggarts investigate.
On the way, they find the car from the passers-by, which has crashed, and the occupants missing.
Taggart Sr.
radios the students, who are ecstatic about imminent rescue.
Shortly after, the Creeper punches through the roof of the bus and grabs Andy "Bucky" Buck by the head.
Rhonda impales the Creeper through the eye with a metal pipe, and it lands on the roof of the bus after trying to fly away.
The teens assume it is dead, but it decapitates Dante with its wing and replaces his head with Dante's. Scotty pries open the bus' doors and another argument ensues when he suggests surrendering the Creeper's targets.
The students leave the bus, and the Creeper chases them across a field, striking Jake in the head with a shuriken, and pinning Scotty to a tree with a dagger.
Double D, Rhonda, and Izzy attempt to help Scotty, but the Creeper grabs him and flies off.
Bucky, Chelsea, and Johnny return to the bus, where the Creeper grabs Bucky again.
Taggart, Jack Jr., and Minxie arrive, and Taggart attacks the Creeper with a homemade harpoon-like weapon he equipped his truck with.
The Creeper rips out the harpoon and throws it back, nearly impaling Jack Jr.
Taggart tries again, but the Creeper destroys the bus and Taggart's truck.
Double D, Rhonda, and Izzy find an empty vehicle, which they use to flee.
As the Creeper pursues them, Double D attempts to shoot it with a flare gun.
As a last resort, Izzy intentionally crashes the truck after throwing out Rhonda, wounding the Creeper and Double D. Before the Creeper can attack Double D, Taggart, his son, and the other students arrive and shoot it in the head with the harpoon.
Taggart repeatedly stabs it, and the Creeper stares up at him in anger as its face closes.
Minxie explains that it is not dead, it has only gone into hibernation for another twenty-three years.
Twenty-three years later, a group of teenagers drive to Taggart's farm, where the Creeper is a sideshow attraction.
When they notice the elderly Taggart, watching the crucified corpse with a harpoon gun at his side, they ask him if he is waiting for something.
Taggart looks up at the Creeper and says, "About three more days, give or take a day or two."