Jiminy Glick in LaLaWood starts off as an Entertainment Tonight or Access Hollywood spoof, but develops into a murder mystery, with David Lynch played by Martin Short as a makeshift Hercule Poirot.
Jiminy Glick (also played by Short) checks into a spooky hotel where Lynch is at the bar, spouting random scenes for his new movie. Glick hits the spotlight when he gets to interview Ben Di Carlo (Corey Pearson), who is starring in an indie flick called Growing Up Gandhi. This movie is a tale of Gandhi's rise as a prize fighter in the boxing rings of India. The film and its star are not well received, except for Glick who enjoyed it. Unfortunately, he fell asleep before the film ended.
After this scoop, Glick gets another prize interview with Miranda Coolidge (Elizabeth Perkins), who becomes the key figure in the murder mystery. Coolidge is starring in a lesbian sexploitation movie called African Queens (a takeoff of The African Queen), but is soon involved in the aforementioned murder.
Glick conducts interviews with real stars like Steve Martin, Kurt Russell, and red carpet interviews with Kiefer Sutherland, Whoopi Goldberg, Sharon Stone, and Jake Gyllenhaal. Jiminy gets kidnapped by Randall Bookerton, a local hip hop recording artist, who wants his animated film, The Littlest Roach, to win Best Picture. Jiminy also becomes a suspect in Miranda Coolidge's "murder". He and Dixie (Jan Hooks) retrieve his cell phone, which mysteriously appears in Miranda's room.
Jiminy thinks that Andre is covering up her murder. David Lynch appears and tells the Glicks what happened. It is revealed that Natalie, Miranda's daughter, killed her girlfriend Dee Dee who was having an affair with Andre, her mother's agent. Dee Dee disguises herself as Miranda in case she got drunk and upset. Glick mistakes her for the real Miranda and passes out in her bedroom. Andre calls some "former business associates" to dispose of Dee Dee's body. Natalie stabs Andre in anger and disgust for how he treats Miranda and other actresses he has worked with.
Natalie goes to jail for 20 years. The future of the film festival is uncertain, and Miranda is considering retirement. Randall Bookerton and his posse are happy to receive an award for their film. Glick, meanwhile, realizes that celebrities can be dull, after interviewing actor Rob Lowe, ending the film. During the credits, bloopers and outtakes are seen with Jiminy interviewing Kurt Russell and Steve Martin.