The film starts off with a rocket carrying two boys and a robotic dog: Jimmy Neutron (Debi Derryberry), Carl Wheezer (Rob Paulsen) and Goddard (Frank Welker). Jimmy is attempting to launch a communications satellite made out of a toaster, hoping to communicate with an alien species he believes exists somewhere out in the universe. Unknown to anyone, the satellite is picked up near the planet Yolkus, home to an alien race called the Yolkians. King Goobot V (Patrick Stewart) and his assistant, Ooblar (Martin Short), watch a pre-recorded message from Jimmy, featuring him introducing himself and explaining about life on Earth.
Jimmy, Carl, and their friend Sheen (Jeffrey Garcia) spot a poster for an amusement park called "Retroland." However, Jimmy's parents, Mr. Hugh Neutron (Mark DeCarlo) and Mrs. Judy Neutron (Megan Cavanagh), refuse to let him go that night because it is a school night, and Jimmy ends up being grounded for the night in his room after accidentally causing a fire with one of his inventions. Jimmy, Carl and Sheen subsequently choose to sneak out and visit the park without their parents' knowledge.
As the three are at the park, the Yolkians set a course for Earth and kidnap all the parents in the city, leaving fake notes on the refrigerators to tell the kids they've gone to Florida for an "extended vacation". Coincidentally, Carl spots a shooting star (actually a Yolkian ship), so he, Jimmy and Sheen wish for no more parents so they can have fun all the time. The next morning, the kids are initially overjoyed upon discovering that their parents have all disappeared, but eventually become despondent over their absence. After hearing a message from his parents that Goddard had recorded while posing as Jimmy last night, Jimmy becomes suspicious of the fact that his parents said they would see him in the morning instead of not being there. He soon discovers what has really happened.
Jimmy organizes the other children in town to build spaceships from the Retroland rides to travel to Yolkus and get their parents back. Eventually they are captured by Goobot, who tells them the parents are to be sacrificed to their goddess, Poultra. He shows the kids Jimmy's video, thanking him for helping him find a suitable species for their ritual, before having the children locked up in their cells.
With Jimmy feeling guilty over the fact that his actions led to the Yolkans abducting the parents in the first place, his rival/love interest Cindy Vortex convinces him to help the rest of the kids escape from their cell. After breaking out with the help of Goddard, the children, in accordance with Jimmy's plan, manage to stop the parents from being sacrificed to Poultra.
Everyone escapes aboard a Yolkian ship, but Goobot follows them in his ship at the head of the Yolkian fleet. With the exception of Goobot's ship, all of the Yolkian ships are destroyed when Jimmy baits them into flying too close to Yolkus' sun. Jimmy and Goddard then use a shrink ray to grow to the size of a planet, and blow Goobot's ship into an asteroid: Goobot and Ooblar survive the explosion, but Goobot declares that they have not seen the last of him. Jimmy reconciles with his parents as all the other kids reunite with theirs, and they make it home.
In a final scene, Jimmy and Carl have breakfast during which Jimmy's parents drink one of his experiments (that causes significant belching), thinking it is real soda and they all laugh.