The opening of the film depicts teenager Ken Park (nicknamed "Krap Nek") skateboarding across Visalia.
He arrives at a skate park, where he casually sits in the middle of it, sets up a camcorder, and shoots himself in the head with a handgun.
His death is used to set up the rest of the film, which follows the lives of four other teens he used to hang out with, shortly before the suicide.
Shawn is the most stable of the four main characters.
He has an ongoing sexual relationship with his girlfriend's mother, Rhonda, throughout the story.
He casually socializes with her family, who, including his girlfriend, are completely unaware of the affair.
Claude fends off physical and emotional abuse from his alcoholic father while trying to take care of his neglectful pregnant mother, who never does anything to defend him.
Claude's father detests him for being insufficiently manly, but after coming home drunk one night, he attempts to perform oral sex on him, causing Claude to run away from home.
Peaches is a girl living alone with her extremely religious father, who fixates on her as the embodiment of her deceased mother.
When her father catches her and her boyfriend, Curtis, on her bed about to have sex, he beats the boy and savagely disciplines her, including forcing her to participate in a quasi-incestuous wedding ritual with him.
Tate is an unstable and sadistic adolescent living with his grandparents, whom he resents and frequently abuses verbally.
He is shown engaging in autoerotic asphyxiation during masturbation.
He eventually murders his grandparents in their bed, in retaliation for his grandfather "cheating" at Scrabble and his grandmother for "invading his privacy". Committing the murder arouses him sexually.
The film cuts frequently between subplots, with no overlap of characters or events until the end.
As Tate is being arrested, Shawn, Claude, and Peaches meet and have sex as a threesome.
The ending finally reveals the motive behind Ken Park's suicide: he had impregnated his girlfriend, who responded to his suggestion of an abortion by asking if he regretted his mother not aborting him.