Philadelphia, 1999. In a violent home invasion, engineer Clyde Shelton (Gerard Butler) is forced to witness the rape and murder of his wife and young daughter by Clarence James Darby (Christian Stolte) and his unwilling accomplice Rupert Ames (Josh Stewart). Prosecutor Nick Rice (Jamie Foxx) is unable to use DNA evidence to securely convict both accused, leading to a possibility that he might lose the case should he support Shelton. Unwilling to take a chance on lowering his 96% conviction rate and stain his public image, he chooses to make a deal with Darby (the actual murderer), letting him plead guilty to a lesser charge, in return for testifying against Ames. Ames is falsely found guilty of masterminding the break-in and personally committing both murders and is sentenced to death. Shelton feels betrayed by Rice's actions, as he had pleaded with him not to make the deal and to at least try convict both of them, and because he chose to release the actual killer. Rice justified to the District Attorney Jonas Cantrell (Bruce McGill) that some justice is better than no justice at all. Darby serves his shortened sentence and is released just a few years later.
Ten years after the conviction, Ames's time on death row is up as he continues protesting his innocence to no avail. Unknown to the prosecutors and the witnesses, the cardiotoxic drug that's usually used in executions by lethal injection has been replaced with another drug (Potassium bromide), causing Ames to die an extremely painful death instead of a painless, merciful one. Evidences relating to tampering with the drug implicate no less than his accomplice Darby. As the police draw near to arrest an unsuspecting Darby, an anonymous caller alerts him and offers him a way to escape, directing him to a remote location nearby. Shelton, disguised as a cop, reveals himself as the caller and paralyzes Darby with puffer fish venom delivered via the grip of a rigged pistol. He takes Darby to an old warehouse and cuffs him to a table, while also hanging a full-length mirror above Darby to force him to watch his own brutal torture. Shelton injects Darby with adrenaline to prevent unconsciousness, while also allowing all pain to be felt. He activates a video camera, and proceeds to use a circular saw to remove Darby's limbs, including his legs and arms, also removing toes and fingers before finally beheading Darby, killing him. When Darby's remains are found, circumstantial evidence tentatively ties his death to Shelton, as the warehouse that the murder was committed was under his name. Despite knowing the evidence is weak, Shelton surrenders himself, and points out the flaws in Rice's case against him. Shelton, knowing Rice will need a confession, baits Rice by telling him he will give a full confession if Rice will get a couple of things for him; the first being a new bed for his cell. Shelton references the conviction 10 years ago, saying that Rice would make deals with criminals. Rice laughs at the offer and ignores Shelton.
As he leaves the interrogation room, Rice receives a phone call from his wife and learns that Shelton had sent a copy of the snuff film of Darby's brutal murder to his house, traumatizing his young daughter. He initially refuses to bargain with Shelton in order to get a confession but Cantrell orders Rice to make the deal. In court, Shelton chooses to represent himself. Instead of confessing, Shelton successfully argues with strong legal context that he should be granted bail, citing weak evidence and lack of criminal record. However, after bail is granted, he suddenly berates the judge for so easily accepting his the "bullshit" legal precedents he himself cited and for being too eager to let madmen and murderers back on the street, intentionally confessing as per his agreement with Rice. Out of anger, the judge jails Shelton for contempt of court.
Once in jail, Shelton demands a porterhouse steak lunch be delivered to his cell by a specific time, but Rice initially laughs off as their earlier deal has already been done. However, Shelton reveals that he would disclose the location of Darby's lawyer, who they then discover was reported missing three days earlier. Rice agrees, though the lunch is delayed by a few minutes due to the warden's additional security measures. Once he received his meal, Shelton provides a set of coordinates, where Rice and the others find Darby's lawyer. He was buried alive in a crate but suffocated when his air supply ran out minutes earlier. Back at the jail, Shelton invites his cellmate to join him in his meal, and baits him by being friendly before stabbing him in the neck with the steak's bone. Upon discovery of the murder, the warden moves Shelton into solitary confinement.
Following a tip, Cantrell arranges a meeting with a CIA contact and takes Rice along. They learn that Shelton had in fact worked with the agency previously as a "brain"; a highly trained agent whose job was creating devices to assassinate people in imaginative ways without even being physically available. Further, they are warned that Shelton has no contacts but is capable of killing anyone he wishes, no matter who they are or where he is. The contact warns them that Shelton does nothing without a reason, and if he's in solitary confinement at the prison, he's there because he wants to be there, and not that they put him there. During a meeting with Rice and Cantrell, the judge who presided over Darby/Ames' case, is killed when she answers her cell phone after agreeing with the two, to breaking the law over Shelton's rights. Shelton demands that Rice drop all charges against him (before 6 am the next day) or more people will die. When Rice again fails to meet the demands, a number of Rice's assistants are killed by car bombs; one of which is Sarah Lowell (Leslie Bibb), a loyal colleague whose death deeply affects Rice. Rice loses his temper and punches a laughing Shelton, whom continues his demands or "I(Shelton) will kill everyone". Rice immediately moves his family to a safe house. As Rice and Cantrell leave Lowell's funeral, Cantrell and several other colleagues are killed by a weaponized bomb disposal robot operated by an unseen person. The angry and frustrated mayor (Viola Davis) puts the city under lockdown and promotes Rice, who initially tries to resign, to acting District Attorney, replacing Cantrell.
While making a further background check on Shelton, Rice discovers that he used to own an auto garage less than a mile from the prison. Exploring this property, Rice and Detective Dunnigan (Colm Meaney) find an underground tunnel that leads to a cache of guns, disguises, and other equipment, right below the solitary confinement cells. Evidence in the tunnel points Rice to Shelton's next target - city hall - where the mayor is holding an emergency meeting with all the city officials. Rice and his men can't find Shelton, but discover evidence pointing to a cellphone-activated napalm bomb in a room directly below where the meeting will take place.
Shelton returns to his cell via the garage after planting the bomb and is surprised to find Rice waiting for him. Rice states that it is the end of the road for him and he should do the right thing. Shelton says that he is doing the right thing but Rice just has to see it that way. Rice explains that it's not right to murder people and he's causing the same pain that he is going through. Shelton suggests another deal, but Rice states that he no longer makes deals with murderers, and that Shelton taught him that. Rice pleads with him not to detonate that last bomb. Shelton hesitates but operates the detonator. Rice quickly leaves the cell, revealing that it was a trick. Shelton discovers the bomb handcuffed to his bed. He sits on his bed pulling out his daughter's bracelet, gazing at it with a look of sadness as the bomb explodes.