The film opens with sorority President Elle Woods on a date with her boyfriend Warner Huntington III, who will be attending Harvard Law School the following year.
During the date, Elle expects a marriage proposal but instead her boyfriend breaks up with her.
Desperate to win Warner back, she prepares and takes the Law School Admission Test and gets into Harvard Law School.
At the school she is ridiculed because of her feminine dress sense and naive behavior.
She also meets Warner's fianceé, Vivian Kensington.
However, In her first class, Elle is ejected for being unprepared.
Determined to succeed, Elle studies hard and impresses everyone, also winning her an internship with the respected Professor Callahan to assist in the defence of Brooke Taylor-Windham, a fitness instructor accused of murdering her billionaire husband.
Elle knows of Brooke as she's used her fitness course and is convinced that she is innocent.
Brooke's alibi is the keystone of the case, but she will not divulge it.
Brooke befriends Elle and reveals her alibi, but asks Elle to keep it secret, which she does.
Without the alibi, Brooke's case weakens.
Elle's fashion background helps her deduce that the prosecution's main witness - the pool boy - is lying about having an affair with Brooke, but when she shares this with Callahan he dismisses it out of hand.
Emmett, Callahan's associate lawyer and Elle's friend, tricks the pool boy into admitting that he is gay in court which disproves his testimony.
Later, Callahan makes sexual advances on Elle which she rejects.
After overhearing part of this attempted seduction, Vivian confronts Elle and accuses her of using sex to further her career.
Frustrated, Elle decides to leave law school.
Professor Stromwell intervenes and reinvigorates Elle's confidence.
Meanwhile, Emmett explains Elle's encounter with Callahan to Vivian and Brooke.
Enraged, Brooke dismisses Callahan and hires Elle as her new attorney.
Elle cross-examines the stepdaughter's testimony and is not only able to disprove it, but provokes the daughter into revealing that she killed her father by accident thinking it was Brooke.
This solves the case and Brooke is exonerated.
After the trial, Warner tries to reconcile with Elle, but she rejects him.
Two years later, Elle graduates with high honors and receives job offer from Boston's best law firms.
Vivian breaks up with Warner and becomes best friends with Elle, leaving Warner to graduate without honors, a girlfriend, or any job offers.
Finally, Emmett starts his own law firm and begins a relationship with Elle, whom he would later propose to after her graduation as top of her class at Harvard Law.