Dr. Jumba Jookiba, the genius (but socially-deviant) creator of an extremely destructive, weaponized living creature (one of many such creatures) known only as "Experiment 626", is arrested and brought to trial before the Grand Councilwoman of the Galactic Federation for "illegal genetic experimentation". Brought before the court as evidence is the actual creature itself, while contained in a capsule, whose behaviour disgusts and alarms those in attendance.
Dr. Jumba is found guilty by the court and sentenced to prison, while the court determines that Experiment 626 is far too dangerous to be kept around civilization and must be disposed of to protect the Federation from potential harm.
It is decided that the creature will be exiled to an isolated, desolate asteroid to prevent it from causing untold destruction and chaos.
The extremely clever and calculating Experiment 626, after studying the behaviour of the automatic guns watching him inside his restraint mechanism, tricks them into shooting each other (and thus freeing himself as a result) using his saliva.
He subsequently manages to escape in a spaceship and activates the hyperdrive, causing its guidance systems to malfunction and randomly set a course for Earth.
The Grand Councilwoman (in consultation with Jumba) is relieved to find that 626's course will crash him in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, which due to his body composition will drown him (water being the creature's main weakness). The relief quickly passes when it is realized that 626's extremely-unlikely course will instead cause him to land on the tiny island chain of Hawai'i. The Grand Councilwoman, after learning that Earth is the home of the endangered mosquito, decides to dispatches Jumba and Earth-expert Agent Pleakley to recover Experiment 626 before he destroys the planet.
After Experiment 626 lands on the small and not-very-populated northwestern Hawaiian island of Kauaʻi, but is knocked unconscious by a passing truck and taken to an animal shelter.
On Kauaʻi, Nani has been struggling to take care of her rambunctious younger sister, Lilo.
A social worker named Cobra Bubbles expresses increasing concern that Nani has not been able to take adequate care of Lilo.
Seeking a change, Nani decides that she will allow Lilo to adopt a dog and they go to the animal shelter, where Lilo immediately takes a keen interest in Experiment 626, who is impersonating a dog in order to escape.
Lilo names 626 "Stitch" and shows him around the island.
As Nani attempts to find a good job, Lilo tries educating Stitch about Elvis Presley, whom she calls a "model citizen". Despite this, however, Stitch's antics, which include foiling Jumba and Pleakley's attempts to capture him, ruin Nani's chances of getting a job every time.
David, a friend of Nani's, invites Nani and Lilo to take a break and enjoy a day of surfing.
While Nani, Lilo, and Stitch ride on a huge wave, Jumba makes one final effort to capture Stitch from underwater, causing Nani to wipe out, and Stitch unintentionally pulls Lilo down with him.
Although everyone gets safely to shore, Cobra witnesses this unfortunate event, telling Nani that although she means well, Lilo's best interests mean she has to be placed with a foster family.
That night, after seeing how much trouble he has caused everyone, Stitch leaves.
Meanwhile, the Councilwoman relieves Jumba and Pleakley of their assignment, inadvertently freeing Jumba to pursue Stitch using less covert methods.
The next morning, David tells Nani of a job opportunity, which Nani rushes to pursue.
Stitch, hiding in the nearby woods, encounters Jumba, who chases Stitch back to Lilo's house.
The two fight, destroying the house in the process, before Nani returns and Cobra arrives in his attempt to collect Lilo and take her away.
As Nani and Cobra argue, Lilo runs away and encounters Stitch, who reveals his true form just moments before they are captured by Captain Gantu, who has been given the task of recovering Stitch after Jumba and Pleakley are unable to do so.
Stitch manages to escape before the ship takes off with Lilo and is confronted by Nani.
Before he tries to explain everything, Jumba and Pleakley capture Stitch themselves.
Nani demands they had better rescue Lilo, but Jumba states that they can't, as they're only there for Stitch.
Nani breaks down over losing her sister, but Stitch manages to tell Nani about ohana, a term for "family" he learned from Lilo, in order to convince Jumba to help rescue Lilo.
As Jumba, Pleakley and Nani give chase in Jumba's spaceship, Stitch is able to drive a tanker truck full of fuel into a lava flow and use the exploding tank to launch himself into Gantu's cockpit, distracting Gantu enough to crash-land the ship and rescue Lilo.
Back on land, the Grand Councilwoman appears, retires Gantu, and is about to take Stitch into custody, but when Stitch explains that he has found a family in Nani and Lilo, she discovers that he has become a civilized creature.
Lilo then shows her the adoption paper for Stich, declaring she owns Stitch and that taking Stitch would be theft.
The Councilwoman, before leaving, decrees that Stitch will be exiled on Earth and entrusted into the care of Lilo and Nani, and asks Cobra (who turns out to be a former CIA agent whom the Councilwoman met previously in 1973) to keep an eye on them.
Together with Jumba and Pleakley, whom the councilwoman left behind, they rebuild the house, and Jumba and Pleakley become members of Lilo and Stitch's family as well.