Jenny Taylor (Amanda Bynes) is a fan of Jason Masters (Chris Carmack), a world-famous rock star, but her efforts to meet him are always thwarted by her nemesis, Alexis (Jamie-Lynn Sigler). Hoping to get another chance, Jenny takes a job at Masters' favorite Caribbean resort, joined by her best friend Ryan (Jonathan Bennett). Jenny sneaks aboard a party vessel Jason is on, and when Jason is washed overboard, Jenny jumps in to save him. Though the pair find themselves marooned in a secluded cove of a seemingly-deserted island, Jenny soon discovers that they have landed a short distance from the resort. She lets him believe they are stranded so she can make him fall in love with her.
Jenny gets help from Ryan, who drives out to her location to provide her with supplies.When Alexis discovers Jenny's plan by following Ryan secretly, she also pretends to be marooned with them. While Ryan has been helping, he has also decided to act on his long-standing love for Jenny, seeking advice on asking her out. He completely transforms himself, yet when she sees him, all she talks about is Jason. Ryan confesses he can't stop thinking about her and kisses her, but when Jenny protests that they are friends he tells her that he's going home, and drives off. Jenny feels bad and tells Jason the truth about not being stranded. He gets upset at both Jenny and Alexis, promises to sue them both, and leaves them behind as he hitches a ride back to the resort.
When Ryan hears that a storm is going to hit the side of the island where Jenny is he drives out to save her. As the storm builds, Jenny gets stuck in the car Ryan had abandoned to look for her, when Ryan returns just in time to save her as the car is about to slide over a muddy embankment. When he takes Jenny into a cave and lights a fire to keep her warm, she realizes that he is the one that cares for her the most. After the storm passes, Jenny and Ryan return to the resort, where Jason and his manager tell Jenny that they need her help to maintain the 'stranded' story at a press conference. Ryan proclaims his love for Jenny but is then forced out by Jason's bodyguard.
At the press conference, Jenny tells everyone that her boyfriend is Ryan and that Alexis is Jason's fiancee, then walks off with Ryan. As the end-credits roll, Jason is on stage in Winnipeg, unhappily dedicating a song to his wife, Alexis, who is standing at his side.