The film takes place in the 1940s, when Shanghai was under Japanese occupation. A young Chinese woman named Mrs Mai is sitting in a luxurious cafe. She makes a phone call, signaling a group of resistance agents to load their weapons.
Hong Kong 1938
The film flashes back to the events which transformed university student Wang Jiazhi into Mrs Mai, her fake identity for the Chinese resistance movement. During the Japanese invasion, Jiazhi had been left behind by her father. She flees from Shanghai to Hong Kong and attends Lingnan University, where she is invited to join a patriotic drama club by a male student, Kuang Yumin (Wang Leehom).
Yumin urges the group to make a greater contribution to the war against Japan. He comes up with a plan to assassinate Mr Yee, a Chinese man who is collaborating with the Japanese government. Jiazhi is chosen for the fictional role of Mrs Mai, the wife of the owner of a Hong Kong-based trading company. Jiazhi is supposed to seduce Mr Yee while the others kill him, but the plan fails when Mr Yee withdraws at the last minute.
It comes to light that Jiazhi is a virgin. Jiazhi reluctantly agrees to sleep with a male member of the group, so that she can practice her seduction skills. However, Mr Yee suddenly moves back to Shanghai, causing the plan to fail. Shortly after, the group is discovered by Mr Yee's assistant. They are forced to kill the assistant and go into hiding.
Shanghai, 1942
Three years later, in Shanghai, Jiazhi again encounters Yumin, who is now an undercover agent for the KMT. Jiazhi is hired once again to kill Mr Yee, who has become the head of the secret police. Posing as Mrs Mai, she successfully becomes Mr Yee's mistress, and discovers that he has passionate feelings for her.
Mr Yee takes Jiazhi to the jewelry store to collect an expensive diamond ring which he ordered. As they enter the shop, several resistance agents are waiting to murder Mr Yee. Jiazhi is overcome by emotion and tells Mr Yee "Go, now." Mr Yee realizes the meaning and quickly flees from the shop. Before the day is over, most of the resistance agents are arrested. It is revealed that Mr Yee's deputy already knew of their existence, but hadn't told Mr Yee. Japanese soldiers lead Jiazhi, Yumin, and the others out to a quarry and execute them.