Max Keeble (Alex D. Linz) is a seventh grade junior high school paperboy who has a huge crush on Jenna (Brooke Anne Smith), the daughter of one of his paper recipients.
Max is antagonized by the corrupt megalomaniacal school principal, Elliot T. Jindrake (Larry Miller), resident bullies Troy McGinty and Dobbs (Noel Fisher and Orlando Brown), and the Evil Ice Cream Man (Jamie Kennedy). Max also learns that an animal shelter he visits is being closed down to build Jindrake's opulent football stadium.
When Max's father, Donald (Robert Carradine), reveals that he is moving to Chicago for his boss, because he is unable to stand up for himself, Max realizes that he can do whatever he wants to Jindrake, Troy, Dobbs, and the Evil Ice Cream Man, facing no consequences because he will be gone by then.
Enlisting his equally socially outcast friends, Robe and Megan (Josh Peck and Zena Grey), pranks include traumatizing Troy by playing the main theme song of the fictional children's television show, MacGoogle the Highlander Frog, which frightened him as a child, trapping him in the gym with a MacGoogle suit wearer, instigating a fight between Dobbs and the Evil Ice Cream Man by stealing the coolant coil for the ice cream truck and Dobbs's handheld device, and ruining Jindrake's chances of becoming superintendent to replace the current superintendent, Crazy Legs (Clifton Davis), by planting animal pheromones within his breath spray, instigating a food fight in the cafeteria, and later by sabotaging his announcements by placing a cardboard cutout of Max pointing at him claiming that he was wearing a thong.
After his missions are completed, Max ends up ditching Robe and Megan's going away party by accepting an invitation to Jenna's milkshake party, causing a falling out.
Taking Max's earlier advice to heart, Don announces that he quit his job and started his own business, meaning that Max is not moving after all.
Max freaks out at this news, and learns that other students at his school are suffering because of his actions.
Max states that no matter who you are, you can always stand up for yourself.
Max confronts Jindrake, Troy, and Dobbs one final time, and with the help of other students at his school, Max eventually defeats Troy and Dobbs for good by throwing them into the dumpster and stops Jindrake from demolishing the animal shelter, which later gets him fired for fiddling with the school budget.
The film ends when Max rides on his bicycle delivering newspapers around his neighborhood, and the Evil Ice Cream Man starts pursuing him once again.