Charlie Baileygates (Jim Carrey) is a veteran Rhode Island State Police trooper who has been taken advantage of by others, starting with his former wife Layla (Traylor Howard). Despite his friends warning him of Layla's infidelity, Charlie refused to accept she was in an affair, even after she gave birth to three bi-racial triplet boys and ran off with her lover who is a short guy.
We don't know if the three bi-racial triplets are Charlie's or Layla had an affair to produce the three bi-racial kids.
In the present, Charlie has raised the sons, Jamal, Lee Harvey, and Shonte Jr (Anthony Anderson, Jerod Mixon, Mongo Brownlee), as his own and they respect him as his father, but Charlie's kind personality continually is misused by others.
As a result of years of such treatment, Charlie develops a split personality named Hank, who is rude and violent to friends and strangers alike.
A psychiatrist prescribes medication to keep Charlie's Hank personality at bay.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Believing that Charlie needs a vacation, his commanding officer (Robert Forster) orders him to escort Irene Waters (Rene Zellweger) from Rhode Island to Massena, New York, because she reportedly committed a hit-and-run.
=======
Believing that Charlie needs a vacation, his commanding officer (Robert Forster) orders him to escort Irene Waters (Renée Zellweger) from Rhode Island to Massena, New York, because she reportedly committed a hit-and-run.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Irene insists the hit-and-run accusation was created by Dickie (Daniel Greene), her mob-connected ex-boyfriend, and by corrupt police officers in his employ, as to assure she does not speak of Dickie's illegal activities to the proper authorities.
In Massena, Charlie prepares to turn over Irene to two United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) agents, when a hitman with a contract on Irene's life attempts to assassinate her, instead killing one of the EPA agents.
Charlie helps Irene to safety and they flee the area, but Charlie accidentally leaves his medication behind, allowing the Hank personality to appear randomly.
The FBI suspects that Charlie is responsible for the murder of the EPA agent.
FBI agents begin pursuing him and Irene, as do crooked police officers in Dickie's pay, Boshane (Richard Jenkins) and Gerke (Chris Cooper). The chase becomes a media spectacle, alerting Charlie's sons to his predicament.
Charlie and Irene decide to return to Rhode Island, developing a bond along the way.
Though Irene is taken by Charlie's personality, the random appearance of Hank worries her, despite the aggressive personality keeping them out of trouble.
Along the way they pick up Casper aka "Whitey" (Michael Bowman), an albino waiter from a restaurant who claims he killed his entire family in the past.
While stopping at a motel, Charlie finds he might be able to suppress Hank and goes to have a conversation with Irene about it, leading to them to sleep together.
However, the next morning, Hank reveals that it was he that slept with Irene.
In the confusion, they are almost ambushed by Boshane and Gerke, but Charlie's sons create a distraction, stealing a police helicopter and allowing Charlie, Irene, and Casper to escape.
They board a train back to Rhode Island.
Dickie boards the same train, unable to rely on his henchmen to stop Charlie and Irene.
He kidnaps her, and Charlie gives chase, managing to convince Hank to work together to save her.
Hank appears to try to stop Charlie from rescuing her, but Charlie finally stands up for himself against his own fears, thus permanently nullifying Hank.
As Charlie tries to wrestle her back and disarm Dickie from an open train car, Dickie shoots off his thumb.
The distraction gives Casper the chance to stab Dickie in the back with a lawn dart, killing him.
Charlie and Irene fall from the train into a river below, where Charlie's sons arrive to help rescue them.
Regrouping with Casper, Charlie apologizes for making him kill again, but Casper reveals he made up his backstory due to the fact that Charlie talked too much at the motel and scared him.
The police arrive but quickly learn of Irene's plight and the corrupt cops working for Dickie.
Gerke is arrested, Charlie's resourcefulness congratulated for bringing him to justice, and Irene is cleared of the charges against her.
Irene prepares to leave Rhode Island when she is pulled over by the police, but this proves only to be a diversion to allow Charlie to propose marriage to her, which she happily accepts.