A United States oil company loses a drill, intended to do work in the Arctic, while flying over a Canadian lake.
Company employee Sean is contacted to go to Canada to find it; however, he has to cancel plans to take his son to Walt Disney World.
Although his son, Mac, is disappointed, he agrees to go with his father to Canada.
Once in Canada, they meet a local native named Custer who helps Sean and another employee on their mission.
They visit the lake using a submarine, and after taking pictures of the bottom of the lake discover incredibly deep giant rivers.
The legend of Mee-Shee states that the rivers lead to the ocean.
Sean and Mac rent the home of Mrs.
Coogan, a kindly lady whom Sean refers to as "Mary Poppins".
Mac, Sean and others see vague images of Mee-Shee that spark their curiosity.
Upon meeting Custer's daughter Pawnee, Mac goes with her to a cave where local native woman "Crazy Norma" feeds Mee-Shee.
This is where they first meet the unique creature.
Mac runs back to the house to tell his dad, but Mrs.
Coogan warns that Mee-Shee's life could be endangered if the outside world knew of it.
Meanwhile, saboteurs Snead and Watkins, agents of a rival oil company who pose as Greenpeace representatives, destroy Sean's equipment and search for the drill themselves.
Their first time under the water, they see Mee-Shee and shoot him with a harpoon.
When Mac finds him again in the cave he removes the harpoon, and tells environmental ranger Laura about it.
Events lead to a search for Mee-Shee and conflicts with the saboteurs.
The saboteurs capture Mee-Shee and attempt to kill him, but an even larger Mee-Shee appears, meaning that the one in the net is a baby and the larger one is an adult.
Enraged, the mother attacks the saboteurs and kills them.
Out of gratitude, the baby Mee-Shee retrieves the drill but they decide that they don't want it and throw it back.
All of a sudden 8 more Mee-Shees appear out of the water, both old and young (showing that there's more than one).