Five years after Agent K's retirement, Agent J (Will Smith) is now a top operative for MIB, the New York City-based agency that secretly monitors and regulates extraterrestrials' activity on Earth. J's former partner, L, decided to return to work in a morgue, leaving J without a partner, and those he has recruited do not live up to his standards once in the agency; he neuralyzes them to erase their memories before returning them to their previous lives.
J is called to investigate the murder of an alien owner of a pizzeria. He interviews the waitress, Laura Vasquez (Rosario Dawson), learning that the murderers were two other aliens, Serleena, a shapeshifting Kylothian who has taken the form of a lingerie model (Lara Flynn Boyle), and Scrad (Johnny Knoxville), a two-headed alien working for Serleena. Laura states they were looking for the Light of Zartha. Though MIB rules state that he should neuralyze Laura, J has become infatuated with her, and lets her go.
J finds the Light of Zartha is a potent weapon, but the only trace of information is tied to K. J goes to Truro, Massachusetts to find K, now working as the postmaster of the town, and convinces him aliens exist by showing the other postal workers are aliens. K agrees to go back to New York City. As they start the deneuralyzing process at MIB headquarters, Serleena and Scrad launch an attack on MIB, causing the facility to go into lockdown. J and K are evacuated from headquarters before the process is complete. J takes K to Jack Jeebs (Tony Shalhoub) to use his illegal deneuralyzer. K regains his former MIB memories, but reveals that he has neuralyzed himself years before regarding the Light. He left himself a series of clues.
At the pizzeria, they find a locker key. While there, Laura expresses concern for her safety, and J takes her to stay with the worm guys. The key opens a locker in Grand Central Station occupied by a society of tiny aliens who worship K as their diety; the aliens give them a video store membership card. At the video store, they find a tape that fictionalizes the story of the Light of Zartha, but watching it causes K to recall the truth: in the past, he and other MIB met the Zarthan Queen Laurana when she arrived on Earth. She requested they keep the Light safe, but MIB was concerned about any retribution. Serleena suddenly arrived and killed Laurana; K activated Laurana's ship which lured Serleena away giving them time to hide the Light. Despite these memories K is unaware of what the Light actually is, but does know that if it is not returned to Zartha soon, it will explode and destroy Earth.
They return to the worm guys to find that Laura has been kidnapped by Serleena, believing a bracelet she wears is the Light. J, K, and the worm guys launch an attack on headquarters, enabling them to free Laura and the other agents; Serleena attempts to flee but is eaten by Jeff, a giant worm-like alien living in the New York Subway. Laura's bracelet leads them to a skyscraper where they find a ship ready to launch and return the Light to Zartha. J and K finally realize that Laura is the Light as the daughter of Laurana; K remains coy when J questions if he is her father. J and Laura are hesitant to let her go but K convinces them it is for the good of the planet. As the ship starts to take off, Serleena, now occupying the form of Jeff, attempts to snatch the ship, but J and K kill her in time, and the ship departs. Because of the publicity of their activities, K initiates a neuralyzer hidden in the torch of the Statue of Liberty to wipe memories across the city.
Later, K and MIB Chief Zed (Rip Torn) try to console J by moving the tiny locker-dwelling alien society—which now worships J—into J's MIB locker. When J suggests showing the miniature creatures that their world is bigger than a locker, K shows J that the human universe is itself a locker within an immense alien train station.