K and Cream first meet each other in high school & both are orphans; K was abandoned by his mother after his father died of cancer who nevertheless left him a sizable sum of money, while Cream lost her entire family in a traffic accident. The two become soulmates and come to share a home, though K watches Cream switch from boyfriend to boyfriend as he keeps his own feelings for her to himself. Knowing that Cream's biggest fear is to be left alone, K keeps the fact that he has terminal cancer a secret, and instead he urges her to marry a kind and healthy man. When Cream announces that she is in love with affluent doctor Joo-hwan, K is left heartbroken, but is satisfied that she has met her ideal partner.
Believing Cream has really found someone she loves, K asked Joo-hwan's fiance to break up with him. Joo-hwan's fiance agrees under the condition that K lets her take photographs of him. It is later revealed that Cream first learned about K's illness when she takes what she thought were K's vitamins, but in fact turned out to be pain medication for terminal cancer patients. Earlier in the movie, Cream asked K what his wish was: for Cream to find a good and healthy man to spend her life with. With her knowledge of his illness, Cream thus faked falling in love with Joo-hwan, in order to appease K. This perspective of Cream's is revealed toward the end of the movie.
The night before Joo-hwan and Cream's wedding, K found the courage to tell Cream that he loves her while Cream replies "me, too". In the end, Cream believes that they are married because they walked down the aisle together when K was sending Cream off to Joo-hwan at their wedding. The movie closes with a scene of Joo-hwan at a burial site where he leaves a photograph of K and Cream as well as Cream's recorder, which contains a recording Cream made for K telling him to wait for her on the other side so that they can be together with "no more tears". The grave is revealed to be Cream's, thus implying that she committed suicide.