The film opens with Mr.
Bean driving up to a church, where a fete is taking place.
Bean wins the first prize in a raffle – a holiday involving a train journey to Cannes, a video camera, and €200.
Following a misunderstanding involving a taxi at the Gare du Nord railway station in Paris, Bean is forced to make his way unorthodoxly towards the Gare de Lyon to board his next train towards Cannes.
However, a vending machine prevents him from boarding, and he misses his train, giving him an hour to sample French seafood cuisine.
Back on the platform, Bean asks Russian movie director Emil Duchevsky (Karel Roden) to use his camcorder to film him walking onto the train.
Bean makes a big fuss and keeps asking for retakes, so by the time they are done, the train is about to leave.
Although Bean manages to get onto the train, the doors close before Duchevsky can get on.
Duchevsky's son, Stepan (Max Baldry) is therefore left on board by himself.
Bean attempts to befriend the boy, who has been told to get off at the next station, and eventually comes to his rescue at the station, unfortunately missing his train again.
The train Stepan's father has boarded does not stop at the station, and a mobile number is held up, with the last two digits obscured.
Attempts at calling the number prove fruitless.
The next train comes and they board.
However, Bean has left his wallet, passport and ticket on the telephone box and they are thrown off the train.
Attempts at begging and miming to Puccini's "O mio babbino caro" prove successful, and Bean buys the pair a bus ticket to Cannes.
Bean managed to lose his, though, and attempts to hitchhike his way there.
Mr Bean soon falls asleep, exhausted from walking and wakes up on what appears to be a quaint French village but is actually a film set.
Bean ends up as an extra in the shooting, directed by Carson Clay (Willem Dafoe), but inadvertently ends up destroying the set in an explosion when he charges his camera.
Bean then tries to hitchhike again and a lime-green Mini identical to his picks him up, driven by Sabine, who offers him a lift to Cannes.
She is an aspiring actress on her way to the 59th Cannes Film Festival where the film that Clay directed is going to be presented with her scene.
When they stop at a service station, Bean finds Stepan dancing in a cafe with a band and they head on.
Sabine assumes Stepan is Bean's son, while Stepan thinks Sabine is Bean's girlfriend.
On the road, Bean and Stepan use Sabine's phone to call his father again, but to no avail, and the trio end up driving through the night, arriving in Cannes the next morning.
At a petrol station, Sabine sees Mr.
Bean's photo on TV as a suspect of kidnapping Stepan and Sabine as Bean's accomplice.
However, since she does not want to miss the film in Cannes in just one hour, she does not want to go to the police now to clear the misunderstandings.
Therefore, they have to work out a way to get into Cannes without being identified.
Stepan dresses up as a girl while Mr.
Bean dresses up as Stepan's grandmother.
The ploy works and Sabine arrives on time.
After sneaking into the premiere, many of the viewers find Clay's film terribly boring and Bean is disappointed to see that Sabine's role has been cut from the film.
He plugs his video camera into the projector, projecting his video diary.
The bizarre tale it tells fits director Carson Clay's narration well, and the director, Sabine and Bean all receive standing ovations and Stepan is finally reunited with his father.
After the screening, Bean leaves the building by the back door, and onto the beach, encountering many of the characters from the film.
The film then ends with Bean and all the other characters of the film miming a large finale to the music of Charles Trenet's song "La Mer", with arms raised in the air.
Just before the credits Bean writes fin in the sand with his foot.