Fotoula "Toula" Portokalos (Nia Vardalos) is going through an early midlife crisis. At thirty, having had her childhood, adolescence and adult life plagued by bad luck, she feels that she is the only woman in her family who has "failed" at being a typical Greek girl. Her family expects her to be more like her 33-year-old sister Athena (Stavroula Logothettis) and marry a Greek boy, make Greek babies, and "feed everyone until the day she dies." Instead, Toula is stuck working in the family restaurant in Chicago, "Dancing Zorba's." Frumpy and cynical, she fears that she is doomed to be stuck with her life as it is and always has been. One day while at the restaurant, Toula briefly becomes enamored with and embarrasses herself in front of Ian Miller (John Corbett), a handsome school teacher.
An argument with her overly-patriotic father Gus (Michael Constantine), who merely wants his daughter to marry and settle down rather than pursue a career, causes Toula to want her own life away from the restaurant and her intrusive family. After some persuasion by his wife, Maria (Lainie Kazan), Gus reluctantly permits Toula to begin taking computer classes at a local community college. Toula then trades her glasses for contact lenses, curls her hair, and begins to wear make-up, improving her confidence, mood and self-esteem. Armed with her skills, Toula convinces her mother and her Aunt Voula (Andrea Martin) to get Gus to allow Toula to work at Voula's travel agency instead of the restaurant.
Toula does better in her new job, even catching the eye of Ian, who is smitten with her. Despite Toula being shy whenever she sees Ian, they finally introduce themselves indirectly, begin to date, and fall in love. Toula tries to keep the relationship secret from her family, until some weeks later when Gus finds out due to the closeness of the Greek American community. He throws a fit because Ian is not an ethnic Greek (a xeno), and he orders Toula to end the relationship and tries to set her up on dates with Greek men, but Ian and Toula continue to see each other against Gus's wishes. Ian proposes to her, and Toula accepts. Gus is hurt and infuriated, feeling that his daughter has betrayed him. Ian, wanting to be with Toula, agrees to be baptized in the Greek Orthodox Church, an act which earns Gus's grudging respect and the acceptance of the rest of the family.
As the months pass, the wedding planning hits snag after snag as Toula's numerous relatives "helpfully" interfere by imposing their ideas into her planning. The situation reaches its head when Gus and Maria invite the entire family to what was meant to be a "quiet" introductory dinner with Ian's demure and private parents. The Millers are not used to such cultural fervor and are completely overwhelmed, a situation made worse by the copious amounts of ouzo they accidentally consume. The evening is a failure, with Gus complaining that the Millers are too dry, "like a piece of toast".
The wedding day dawns with liveliness and hysteria and though Toula is nervous, the traditional Greek wedding itself goes without a hitch albeit in a comical fashion. At the reception, Gus gives a speech accepting Ian and the Millers as his new family. As his wedding gift, he presents the newlyweds with a deed to a new home. Following the reception and colorful Greek dancing, Toula and Ian drive away to begin their honeymoon and married life together.
An epilogue shows the new couple's life six years later. They have had a daughter, who complains that she would prefer not to go to Greek school. Toula placates her by assuring her that when the time comes, she can marry whomever she wants. As they walk towards Greek school, it is revealed that their home is right next door to that of Toula's parents.