Five contestants, Matt (Sean Cw Johnson), Emma (Laura Regan), Charlie (Jennifer Sky), Danny (Stephen O'Reilly) and Rex (Kris Lemche), agree to take part in a reality webcast, where they must spend six months in a house to win $1 million.
If anyone leaves, then no one wins the money.
Nearing the end of the six months, tension between the contestants rises after Emma finds strange messages she believes are from a man from her past and the food packages arrive containing containing a letter that claims Danny's grandfather has died, and a gun with five bullets.
One night, a man named Travis Patterson (Bradley Cooper) arrives, claiming he is lost in the woods and that his GPS has died.
Despite claiming to be an internet programmer, he claims to not recognise any of the contestants or have ever heard of the show.
Later that night, Travis has sex with Charlie, and then secretly talks directly into a camera, to communicate with whoever is watching them.
The next morning, Travis leaves and Danny discovers his backpack outside covered in blood and shredded to pieces.
The contestants assume he was attacked by an animal but Rex believes Travis works for the people running their show and that it is all a trick to make them leave the house and forfeit the prize money.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Emma discovers her underwear among Dannys belongings and confronts him, unaware that Travis planted them there the previous night.
=======
Emma discovers her underwear among Danny’s belongings and confronts him, unaware that Travis planted them there the previous night.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Danny denies it and attempts to make peace by giving her a crudely carved wooden cat, which Emma and Charlie ridicule, while Danny overhears.
The next morning, the group finds Danny has committed suicide by hanging himself from the staircase balcony with a rope.
The guests finally decide to leave, but after being unable to contact anyone via radio, decide to wait until the next morning.
Rex uses the GPS unit from Travis' bag and his laptop to gain access to the internet to find out more about the show but is unable any evidence of their show online.
He is only able to find a heavily encrypted beta site, that requires a $50,000 fee to access, and displays a web page with their pictures and betting odds.
The group decides they will leave the next morning, though Rex and Emma go up to the roof to set off a flare.
While Charlie and Matt remain in the house, Matt asks a camera if he should kill her, before suffocating her with a plastic bag.
Later, while Emma is sleeping, Rex comes downstairs and is decapitated with an axe by Matt.
Matt awakens Emma and brings her up to the attic, telling her he is being chased and the others are dead.
He then makes advances on Emma, who refuses them, causing him to attempt to rape her, before she stabs him in the back and runs off.
Emma runs outside and finds a police officer handcuffs her inside the car and enters the house.
An injured Matt then crawls out, begging the cop to let him kill Emma, since spent six months in the house with her.
Realizing they are working together, Emma escapes the car and tries to run but is shot in the back with a rifle by the cop.
Matt and the cop sit in the kitchen discussing the setup they created with Travis for their high paying clients who want to witness the murders.
When the cop says there are always "five suckers" to play the game with, Matt corrects him to four, and is then shot in the head.
The cop then leaves, talking to Travis over the radio, while Emma is seen locked in a small room, unable to escape.
As she collapses screaming, the cameras filming all shut off, one by one.