Born in 1972 in Kansas, 8-year-olds Neil McCormick and Brian Lackey are sexually abused by their baseball coach.
Both boys are targets for abuse due to their dysfunctional families: Neil's single mother, Ellen, is neglectful and preoccupied with a string of boyfriends, while Brian's parents are on the verge of divorce.
Neil shows homosexual proclivities at an early age—he is fascinated with male models depicted in his mother's Playgirl magazines.
He interprets the coach's abuse as an initiation into sexuality and becomes sexually compulsive, being mainly attracted to "bearish" middle-aged men.
Neil begins prostituting himself at the age of fifteen.
Eventually he leaves home, drifts into petty crime, and becomes a prostitute in New York City.
His friend Wendy, who harbors an unrequited crush, describes Neil as having not a heart, but "a bottomless black hole, that you fall into". Neil begins showing a compassionate side, particularly following an encounter with a man dying from AIDS.
Though Neil suspects the man wants sex, he actually wants nothing more than to feel another person's touch.
The encounter leads Neil to withdraw from prostitution and take a job as a cashier.
Brian reacts to his abuse by developing psychogenic amnesia.
He remembers waiting for his parents to drive him home from a baseball game, followed by a gap of several hours after which he regained consciousness, bloodied and hiding under the crawl space of his home.
For many years Brian suffers from chronic nose bleeds and bed-wetting.
In his teen years, Brian becomes nerdy and withdrawn, perceived by others as nearly asexual.
He has unsettling recurring dreams about being touched by a strange, bluish hand.
These odd dreams lead Brian to suspect that he and another boy may have been abducted by aliens.
At the age of 18, Brian meets a young woman named Avalyn who believes she was abducted by aliens.
They begin to form a friendship, but when she takes a romantic interest in him and touches him sexually, he panics and refuses to speak to her again.
While trying to untangle his confused memories, Brian sees a photo of his childhood baseball team, recognizing a young Neil as the boy from his dreams.
Taking the initiative to meet his former teammate, Brian instead meets Neil's friend Eric, and through him learns about their common acquaintance.
After being beaten and raped by a trick, Neil leaves New York City and returns home.
Eventually, Neil and Brian meet for the first time in over a decade.
After breaking into the home that was previously rented by the baseball coach, Neil explains how the coach groomed both boys to make the abuse seem normal, and how a bluish porch light gave the abusive incidents an eerie atmosphere.
He then tells Brian that the coach made them kiss each other before he kissed them both and made them perform sexual acts on him.
Brian breaks down and collapses into Neil's arms as Christmas carolers sing "Silent Night".