Norbit Albert Rice (Eddie Murphy) and Kate Thomas (Thandie Newton) are best friends as children at a combination Chinese restaurant and orphanage owned by their father figure, Mr.
Wong (Eddie Murphy), but are separated when Kate gets adopted.
While being bullied by twins on a playground one day, Norbit is saved by a tough, overweight girl named Rasputia Latimore (Eddie Murphy) who scares him into being her boyfriend.
Though at first she genuinely likes Norbit and cares about him, going as far as intimidating other kids into letting Norbit play with them  Rasputia's kindness deteriorates as she grows up to be an ignorant, arrogant, vindictive, and mean-spirited woman.
She eventually pressures Norbit into marrying her, and bullies, insults, and controls him to make sure that she keeps him all to herself.
Norbit is also belittled by Rasputia's older brothers, Big Black Jack (Terry Crews), Blue (Lester 'Rasta' Speight), and Earl (Clifton Powell), working as a bookkeeper at their local construction company.
The Latimore brothers also run a "security business" and instill fear in everyone in the town except Mr.
Wong, who refuses to sell his establishment to them.
When Norbit realizes that Rasputia is cheating on him with her dance instructor Buster Perkin (Marlon Wayans), she carelessly brushes it off like nothing happened.
Norbit vents out his anger over Rasputia's infidelity at a puppet show for the children at the orphanage.
Unexpectedly, during the show, Norbit sees Kate for the first time since childhood.
Stunned by her return, his affection for her reignites while he learns that she is buying Mr.
Wong's orphanage, but he is disappointed to find out that she is now engaged to Deion Hughes (Cuba Gooding, Jr.). With help from his two ex-pimp friends Pope Sweet Jesus (Eddie Griffin) and Lord Have Mercy (Katt Williams) and the other townspeople, Norbit manages to meet with Kate without Rasputia's knowledge.
Revealed to be a crooked businessman and gold digger, Deion helps the Latimore brothers in their plan to turn the restaurant/orphanage into a strip club to get a cut in the profit.
The Latimore brothers dupe Norbit into getting Kate to sign papers to renew the restaurant's liquor license and put it in the Latimores' name.
Norbit's meeting with Kate leads to him helping her rehearse her wedding, where a kiss between the two of them causes her to reconsider the marriage.
When Norbit returns home, he learns that Rasputia somehow witnessed the whole thing and she threatens to kill Kate if she ever sees Norbit with her again.
Kate confronts Norbit after finding out about the deal and sees him in the window of the basement, where he has been locked away by a vengeful Rasputia.
Norbit reluctantly insults Kate, deliberately driving her away so that Rasputia won't follow through with her previous threat to kill Kate.
Rasputia adds that Norbit played Kate and has been setting her up since the first day she came back to town.
Fed up with the stress he is under, Norbit decides to leave town for good, but first tries to warn Kate about Deion, but she ignores him.
After that, the Latimores have him locked in the basement again and Blue is chosen to stay and keep him from escaping.
After the other Latimores leave to go to the wedding, Norbit escapes from the basement and past Blue's guard and races to the church on his bike.
Though the Latimores attempt to stop him, Norbit reaches the church and informs Kate of Deion's gold digging schemes.
Unfortunately, his proof of Deion's divorce settlements were destroyed in the process, due to his falling in a pond while escaping the Latimores.
However, Deion's ex-wives and children show up in person, as Norbit had arranged to provide further proof of Deion's wrongdoings.
Confronted by them, Deion declares defeat and runs off, effectively ending the marriage.
Furious that their plans are ruined, the Latimore brothers attempt to kill Norbit before finding the townspeople rallying up against them.
Rasputia fights her way through the crowd and almost kills Norbit, but she runs off after being harpooned in the buttocks by Mr.
Wong.
Her brothers are then chased out of town.
After Kate avows her love for Norbit with a passionate kiss, the two reconcile.
Kate and Norbit buy the orphanage and get married under the same tree where they once played as children.
Rasputia and her brothers move to Mexico and open up El Nipplopolis, where Rasputia becomes their most popular and lucrative stripper.