Paul Blart (Kevin James) Is a resident in West Orange, New Jersey with his teenage daughter, Maya (Raini Rodriguez), and elderly mother, Margaret (Shirley Knight). Aspiring to join the New Jersey State Police, he trains at the police academy, but his hypoglycemic medical condition causes him to collapse, therefore failing the exam.
To shape things up for his career, Blart works as a security guard at the West Orange Pavillion Mall.
Blart patrols the mall on a Segway to assure things are safe and clean.
He goes to the surveillance room and trains Veck Simms (Keir O'Donnell), who is new but uninterested on the job.
Meanwhile, Blart eventually becomes acquainted with Amy Anderson (Jayma Mays), the vendor of a new kiosk.
He meets her one evening at a restaurant with other mall employees.
Things initially go well, but Blart is sidetracked when he decides to participate in a nacho-eating contest with his friend Leon (Jamal Mixon). The hot sauce is more than Blart can handle, and he begins chugging down several alcoholic beverages causing him to become excessively drunk and incoherent.
He crashes the party and makes a wild exit by falling through a window.
Two days later, on the night of Black Friday, an organized gang of thugs disguised as Santa's Village employees begin what appears to be a bank heist inside the mall.
They take Amy and other customers in the bank hostage.
Simms is revealed as the gang's leader  his mall security job was a ploy to gather intelligence.
They are keeping the hostages as insurance for the gang's escape.
The crew forces shoppers to exit the mall and strategically places motion sensors around each entrance to detect any attempt to enter or exit the building.
Blart takes a break in the arcade and plays Detroit Rock City via Rock Band.
He eventually walks back out in the mall, and discovers the entire mall is evacuated and under a state of emergency.
Upon realizing this, he calls the police, and slips out of the mall to speak with Commander Sergeant Howard (Adam Ferrara). Blart realizes Anderson is still inside after spotting her car in the parking lot and decides to return to the mall to look for her.
A state SWAT team soon arrives with Commander James Kent (Bobby Cannavale) at the helm.
Kent, a former classmate and bully from Blart's childhood, takes control of the police units and orders Blart to let them handle the situation.
After spotting Anderson as one of the hostages, Blart refuses and attempts a rescue.
Vastly outnumbered and physically outclassed, Blart takes a stand against Simms' crew using improvised measures to take them down one by one.
He discovers credit card codes written in invisible ink on the burglars' arms and realizes that their real plans go beyond robbing the bank.
Maya, unaware of what has happened, shows up at the mall on her way to bring Blart some food, but Simms' remaining henchmen seize her and add her to the hostage group.
Blart manages to arrest all of Simms' accomplices and attempts to evacuate the hostages by pulling them up through an air vent.
The plan fails when Leon cannot fit.
Simms enters the room, capturing Blart and forcing him to give up the credit card codes he recorded on his cell phone.
Simms escapes, kidnapping Anderson and Maya.
As police swarm the mall to apprehend the criminals and rescue the hostages, Blart borrows a display minivan and joins Kent in pursuing Simms to the airport, where he is attempting to escape to the Cayman Islands.
After a brief scuffle, Blart overpowers Simms and puts him in handcuffs.
Moments later, however, Kent pulls his gun on Blart revealing that he was in cahoots with Simms.
Kent demands the phone containing the codes from Blart, who refuses and responds by smashing the phone into the ground.
Before Kent can retaliate by shooting Blart, Chief Brooks (Peter Gerety) of the mall security team arrives in time and shoots Kent in the arm.
Kent and Simms are arrested, and Anderson and Maya are returned safely.
For his bravery and assistance, Howard offers Blart a job with the New Jersey State Police.
Blart honorably declines opting to remain in mall security.
Blart and Anderson are eventually married in the mall, where they exchange vows on a set of black and white Segways.