Grenouille (French for "frog") is born in Paris, France in 1738; his mother is almost immediately tried for previous infanticide leaving him an orphan.
He is fostered but is a difficult solitary child and eventually apprenticed to a tanner.
Unknown to the world around him, he has a remarkable sense of smell, and an extraordinary ability to discern odors; as a result he can perform apparently magical feats such as identifying bad vegetables by the worms they contain, or visitors as they approach the house, and can navigate in total darkness by the smell of objects around him.
On a day when he had memorized nearly all the smells of the city, he is surprised by a smell quite unlike the dirty, coarse ones he is familiar with.
Entranced, he traces it with his nose, and finds that the source of this scent is a young, virginal girl just passing puberty.
Feeling her scent to be a revelation and that he must possess it, he kills her and stays with her body until the scent has left it.
In his quest to learn more of the art of scent-making, he becomes apprenticed to a once great perfumer, Baldini, and proves himself a wunderkind although this is not revealed to anyone except Baldini.
Baldini eventually reveals to him that there are techniques other than distillation that can be used to preserve a wider range of odours, which can be found in the heartland of the perfumier's craft, in the region of Grasse, in the French Riviera.
On his way to Grasse, Grenouille travels the countryside and discovers that he is disgusted with the scent of humanity.
Avoiding habitations, he comes instead to live in a mountain cave for many years, However his peace is broken when he realizes after some years that he himself has no scent.
Travelling to Montpellier with a fabricated story about being kidnapped and kept in a cave to account for his appearance, he creates a body odour for himself from everyday materials, and finds that his new "disguise" tricks people into thinking that it is the scent of a human; he is now accepted by society instead of given a wide berth.
Humanity being fooled by a simple scent, his hate turns into contempt.
He realizes that it is within his ability to develop scents described as "superhuman" and "angelic", that will affect in an unprecedented way, how other people perceive and feel him.
Reaching Grasse, he trains in the arts of scent extraction and preservation and one day encounters a second scent that is even more inspiring to him than his original victim.
He decides this time that he will seek to preserve the scent physically and not just in his memory, and begins a campaign of serial killing of teenage girls to practice keeping and preserving their scent - the victims are not otherwise molested beyond the removal of their hair for scent preservation.
The father of his target realizes his daughter must be the goal of the murderer's campaign and telling nobody, takes her to a place of safety, but Grenouille follows them by following her scent, and when they stop for the night, he finally kills her and successfully preserves her scent.
He is caught red-handed shortly afterwards and sentenced to death.
However on the way to his execution he wears a new scent he has created, that causes awe and adoration in others, and although the evidence of his guilt is absolute, the crowd are so drawn to him, and a belief in the innocence he now exudes, that he is freed; even the victim's father asks if he would consider being adopted as his son.
Grenouille however now realizes how much he hates people, and that even this degree of control does not make him happy.
Returning to Paris, he is torn to pieces by a crowd who are so drawn to him due to his scent, that they became compelled to obtain and consume pieces of him.
The story ends with the reflection of those in the crowd, who are left embarrassed by their own action, but are also left "uncommonly proud.
For the first time they had done something out of Love."