Eeyore, Rabbit, Tigger, and Pooh are working on a plan to get honey from a beehive. Piglet wants to help, but his friends tell him he is too small. When the plan goes awry, Piglet saves the day by trapping the bees in a decoy hive. But no one notices what Piglet had done. Feeling ignored and unappreciated, Piglet sadly wanders away.
Piglet's friends realize that he is missing and search for him, using a scrapbook Piglet made of their past adventures as a guide. On the way to Kanga's house, they reminisce about when Kanga and Roo arrived in the Hundred Acre Wood. Everyone was afraid of the newcomers and Rabbit concocted a plan to use Piglet as a decoy so they could kidnap Roo. Kanga pretended to believe that Piglet was Roo and gave him a dose of fish oil and a bath. She gave him a cookie afterwards and Piglet realized that she was actually very nice. Roo and Rabbit had become friends and everyone agreed that Kanga and Roo should stay.
Back in the present, Roo joins the search party and they head to the next destination in the scrapbook: the North Pole. They remember the story of the expedition to find the Pole. Partway through the expedition, Roo fell into the river. Tigger, Rabbit and Eeyore tried to save him but failed. Piglet used a very long stick to catapult Roo out of the river and handed it off to Pooh as he ran to try and catch Roo. Christopher Robin arrived on the scene, saw Pooh holding the stick, and declared that Pooh had discovered the North Pole. Piglet's role in both Roo's rescue and the Pole's discovery went unacknowledged.
Back in the present, Piglet's friends express their regrets for not celebrating Piglet's heroism. They become increasingly worried as a storm rolls in. To reassure Roo, Eeyore and Pooh tell him about the time Piglet built a house for Eeyore. Piglet had pointed out to Pooh that Eeyore didn't have a house to keep him warm. Pooh decided that they should build Eeyore a house on that very spot, which he named "Pooh Corner." Pooh briefly considered calling it "Pooh and Piglet Corner" before deciding that "Pooh Corner" sounded nicer. Tigger joined Pooh in trying to build the house while Piglet struggled to keep up. Eventually, Pooh and Tigger gave up. Then they learned that Eeyore had already built himself a house out of sticks, though it had gone missing. Pooh and Tigger realized that they were using Eeyore's old house to build Eeyore's new house. As they struggled to explain, Piglet arrived and led them back to Eeyore's newly completed house. Once again, Piglet's contributions were overlooked as the wind got the credit for moving Eeyore's house.
As the rain begins to fall, Tigger wants to skip to the end of the book to find where Piglet is, but Rabbit insists that they go through it in order. They begin fighting over the book and it falls in the river. The friends sadly return to Piglet's house to keep Roo from catching a cold. They draw new pictures of Piglet, then set out to look for him again. They find the scrapbook bindings, suspended on a hollow log, overhanging a raging waterfall. Pooh goes to retrieve it, but falls into a hole in the log.
Pooh's friends form themselves into a rescue rope, but it's not quite long enough and Pooh is stuck hanging precariously over the waterfall. Piglet appears and pulls Pooh to safety, but the log begins to break. Rabbit, Eeyore, Tigger, and Roo all make it to solid ground, just in time to see half of the log plummet to the water below. Tigger, Rabbit, Roo and Eeyore begin to cry and almost fail to notice Pooh and Piglet emerging from inside of the other half of the log. Piglet's friends take him home and show him the drawings they've made of him, demonstrating their appreciation for everything Piglet had done. They have a party and Pooh shows Piglet the new sign for the renamed "Pooh and Piglet Corner."