In the early 18th Century while sailing to Port Royal, Jamaica, Governor Weatherby Swann, his daughter Elizabeth, and Lieutenant James Norrington encounter a burning shipwreck and recover a young boy, William Turner.
Elizabeth hides a golden pirate medallion owned by Will so as to protect him, and keeps it due to her interest in pirates, and sees a ghost ship vanishing into the fog.
Eight years later, Norrington is promoted to the rank of Commodore and proposes to Elizabeth, but her tight corset causes her to faint and fall into the sea, still wearing Will's necklace, which casts a summoning spell.
She is rescued by Captain Jack Sparrow, whom Norrington identifies as a pirate due to his branded mark; Sparrow came to Port Royal intending to commandeer a ship.
Jack attempts to escape but runs into Will, now a blacksmith and talented swordsman.
They engage in a duel, but Jack is knocked unconscious and captured by Norringtons men, and imprisoned.
Later, the Black Pearl, the ship Elizabeth saw as a child, attacks Port Royal in search of the medallion, whom it summoned.
Two pirates, Pintel and Ragetti, escort Elizabeth to meet Captain Barbossa to negotiate parley.
Elizabeth says her last name is Turner, to conceal her identity as the governor's daughter, but is held as Barbossa's prisoner.
When Elizabeth tries unsuccessfully to kill him, Barbossa reveals to her that his crew are cursed as immortals, after taking the Aztec treasure of Cortez from Isla de Muerta, and they appear as skeletons in moonlight.
In order to free themselves, the crew have been gathering all 882 gold pieces and giving blood sacrifices, but they still need the last piece and Elizabeths blood to lift the curse.
Will frees Jack from prison to rescue Elizabeth, as he agrees when learning Wills maiden name.
They commandeer the HMS Interceptor by pretending to steal the HMS Dauntless.
They head for Tortuga to recruit new crewmates, including Jacks friend Joshamee Gibbs.
Jack reveals that Wills father, Bootstrap Bill Turner, was a pirate himself, and learns that Jack was captain of the Black Pearl until Barbossa mutinied and marooned him on an island, leaving him with a pistol loaded with a single shot that Jack never used, intending to shoot Barbossa.
Arriving at Isla de Muerta, Will and Jack observe Barbossa commencing the blood ritual, fails because of Elizabeth not being the child of Bootstrap Bill.
Will rescues Elizabeth and brings her to the Interceptor, while Jack reunites with his former crew, but is locked in the Pearls brig.
The Pearl pursues the Interceptor, taking the crew hostage and destroying the ship.
Will makes a deal with Barbossa to release Elizabeth in exchange for lifting the curse, but Barbossa maroons Jack and Elizabeth on the same island Jack was left on before.
Elizabeth makes a smoke signal using Jacks hidden supply of rum, alerting the Dauntless and reuniting with her father and Norrington, who agrees to rescue Will when Elizabeth accepts his proposal.
Jack and Norrington plot an assault on the pirates with Jack going in to lure them out, but the plan goes awry when Barbossa sends his crew underwater to assassinate the Dauntless' crew.
Elizabeth escapes the Dauntless alone, freeing Jacks crew from the Pearl, and ventures to the island to rescue Will.
Jack eventually mutinees by freeing Will and dueling Barbossa, while Elizabeth fights off the crew.
Barbossa eventually tries to fatally stab Jack, but reveals that he is cursed after stepping into a ray of moonlight, having taken and kept a piece of gold from Cortezs chest, and revealing his mutinee as a planned strategy.
Jack then shoots Barbossa, with Will lifting the curse by revealing the blood-stained gold and dropping it in the chest; Barbossa bleeds out and dies, the rest of the crew is captured by the militia, and Jack, Elizabeth, and Will escape.
A short time later, Jack is captured and faced with multiple charges, and is condemned to a public hanging at the same time.
Will soon rescues him while in the process of being hanged, as Elizabeth fakes fainting again to draw attention.
As Will tries to escape, the two are soon then captured, and about to be put to death.
Elizabeth defends them both by stating her role, and demands they be spared.
While in the argument, Jack escapes aboard the Black Pearl.
Governor Swann pardons Will and gives his blessing for Elizabeth to marry him.
Jack Sparrow is greeted aboard by the new crew of the Black Pearl, as they set sail and leave.
In a post-credits scene, Barbossas pet monkey Jack regains immortality by stealing a piece of gold from the chest.