During a thunderstorm, a traveling circus accidentally leaves behind a baby zebra.
The foal is rescued by widower Nolan Walsh, a former Thoroughbred-racehorse trainer who retired when his wife, a jockey, died in a racing accident.
Nolan takes the zebra home to his farm and leaves it under the care of his daughter Channing "Chan" Walsh, who names him "Stripes". Stripes befriends the other farmyard animals, including Saanen goat Franny and Shetland pony Tucker.
One day, he becomes convinced that he is destined for the nearby racetrack, the Kentucky Open, after watching a race, not realizing that he is a zebra and is not qualified to race.
Three years later, an adult Stripes meets a Lipizzaner mare named Sandy and develops a crush on her.
While talking to Sandy, he is approached by Trenton's Pride and Ruffshodd, Stripes' tormentors.
Pride challenges Stripes to a racing match; he accepts, but loses the race.
The following day, Tucker, having secretly watched Stripes, approaches him and suggests that he get proper training first.
Stripes, in need of a rider, chooses Chan and convinces a new farm animal, a pelican named Goose, to sabotage Chan's motorcycle and Nolan's old pickup truck so that Chan can ride him to her workplace at the Kentucky Open.
The plan works, and Chan, with Nolan's reluctant approval, rides Stripes to the Kentucky Open.
There, Chan is antagonized by her boss, Clara Dalrymple, for bringing Stripes to the racetrack, while he meets a pair of horsefly brothers, Buzz and Scuzz.
As night approaches, Chan, remembering her first ride on horseback with her mother, completes a lap around the racetrack with Stripes.
They are approached by Woodzie, a racetrack gambler, who encourages Chan to sign her and Stripes up for a tryout race tomorrow.
She does, despite Nolan's disapproval, but Stripes becomes scared by the horse-gate, and then gets hit in the face by flying dirt while racing, causing Chan to fall off.
Though she is uninjured, Nolan chastises her.
Then, Dalrymple sarcastically signs Stripes up to compete in the Kentucky Open competition.
Meanwhile, Stripes realizes he is a zebra, which severely discourages him.
Despite Chan's pleas, Nolan refuses to let her race with Stripes.
Realizing this, the farm animals lure Nolan into the farm to show him a table holding his accomplishments, and he changes his mind.
Meanwhile, Franny reveals to Stripes that Tucker helped Nolan train the racehorse champions without getting any thanks, which encourages him to begin training.
Refusing to allow Stripes to race, Pride's father Sir Trenton and several Thoroughbreds ambush Stripes and Sandy at a creek as they are talking, kidnapping Sandy and threatening to hurt her if he races.
Stripes, Tucker, Franny, and Goose agree to rescue Sandy.
With Buzz and Scuzz's help, they rescue Sandy from the stables.
They then rush back to the farm, where Nolan, Chan, and Woodzie take Stripes and Tucker to the Kentucky Open.
When the race begins, Stripes is unable to keep up with the other racehorses, and several other jockeys try to sabotage him.
However, he remembers a piece of advice given to him by Tucker.
This encourages him to catch up with Pride, who is in the lead, and Stripes manages to win.
Impressed, Pride makes amends with Stripes, while an unsatisfied Dalrymple is embarrassed when Goose shoots bird droppings on her hat in public.
As Nolan and Chan are awarded, Stripes approaches Tucker and gives him his award wreath as thanks.
At the end of the film, Stripes, Chan, Nolan, and all of Stripes' animal friends take their picture together.