In 1971, at the desegregated T. C. Williams High School, a black head coach Herman Boone (Washington) is hired to lead the school's football team.
Boone takes over from the current coach Bill Yoast (Patton), nominated for the Virginia High School Hall of Fame.
As a show of respect, Boone offers an assistant coordinator coaching position to Yoast.
Yoast at first refuses Boone's offer, but reconsiders after the white players pledge to boycott the team if he does not participate.
Dismayed at the prospect of the students losing their chances at scholarships, Yoast changes his mind and takes up the position of defensive coordinator.
Black and white football team members frequently clash in racially motivated conflicts at their football camp, including some between captain Gerry Bertier (Hurst), and Julius Campbell (Harris). But after forceful coaching and rigorous athletic training by Boone, which includes an early morning run to Gettysburg, and a motivational speech, the team achieves racial harmony and success.
After returning from football camp, Boone is told by a member of the school board that if he loses even a single game, he will be fired.
Subsequently, the Titans go through the season undefeated while battling racial prejudice, before slowly gaining support from the community.
Just before the state semi-finals, Yoast is told by a member of the school board that he will be inducted into the Hall of Fame after the Titans lose one game, implying he wants Boone to be fired over his race.
During the game, it becomes apparent that the referees are biased against the Titans.
Yoast warns the head official that he will go to the press and expose the scandal unless it is refereed fairly.
The Titans win, but Yoast is told that his actions have resulted in his loss of candidacy for induction.
While celebrating the victory, Bertier is in an automobile accident, after driving through an intersection.
Although Bertier could not play due to being paralyzed from the waist down, the team goes on to win the championship.
Bertier would remain a paraplegic for the rest of his life.
Ten years later Bertier dies in another automobile accident being hit by a drunk driver after winning the gold medal in shot put in the Paralympics.
His family, coaches and friends reunite to attend his funeral.
In the epilogue, we find out what happened to the players and coaches after the events:
Herman Boone coached the Titans football team for five more years until he retired and is now living in Alexandria, Virginia.
Bill Yoast assisted Boone for four more years, and he retired from coaching in 1990.
They became good friends and continue their friendship today.
Gerry Bertier was a two-time all American, and became a leader and inspiration to the handicapped community in Virginia.
He was killed in a car crash with a drunk driver in 1981, and the gym at T.C. Williams was renamed after him.
Big Julius Campbell was named to the 1971 all-American team.
When his football days were over, he began working for the city of Alexandria.
He and Bertier remained close friends until Gerry's death.
Sheryl Yoast continued to help her father on the field.
She died of heart disease in 1996 at age 36.
Ronnie "Sunshine" Bass became a starting quarterback at the University of South Carolina.
He lives in Greenville, South Carolina, and works for ABC.
Petey Jones remained in Alexandria and works for Alexandria's school system.
He still works there today.
Jerry Harris, The "Rev", retired from football after the 1971 season.
He attended Federal City College, and currently works for US Air.
Lewis Lastik played four years of college football at Austin Peay State University.
He graduated and became a successful businessman living in Tennessee.