The movie opens outside of a building where terrorists are holding hostages and a nuclear bomb.
The Reno Sheriff's Department arrives in a helicopter, called in as experts.
As the group prepare to deal with the situation, Deputy Travis Junior (Robert Ben Garant) wakes up and realizes it was a dream; he was sleeping at the wheel and the vehicle he and Lt.
Dangle are in crashes.
<<<<<<< HEAD
The film continues with introductory clips of the officers, telling how they became interested in law enforcement,  la COPS.
=======
The film continues with introductory clips of the officers, telling how they became interested in law enforcement, à la COPS.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
After a scene involving a chicken in the road miscoded as an "armed person on a roof", Dangle tells everyone that they have been invited to the American Police Convention in Miami Beach.
On arrival, the group finds they are not on the entrant list.
Having nowhere to stay, they rent rooms at a motel that seems to be a hub of illegal activities.
That night, the police officers unsuccessfully attempt to seduce one another, and turn to self-pleasure.
As everyone recovers from their hangovers, Johnson discovers a tattoo on her breast of a mystery man, later revealed to be Garcia.
The team goes to the convention site to see if their tickets were found.
On arrival, they discover the building has been the subject of a bio-chemical terrorist attack, and the police inside are quarantined.
The only city official left outside is assistant deputy mayor Jeff Spoder (Patton Oswalt). The head of National Security asks Reno Sheriffs Department to provide law enforcement for Miami Beach.
A high-ranking SWAT agent (Dwayne Johnson, a.k.a. The Rock) arrives on the scene, who accidentally blows himself up with a grenade.
The team assume the Miami Sheriff's responsibilities, and respond to several emergency calls: an alligator is reported in a swimming pool and a neighbour is killed by another gator after finding the first one dead; reports of street prostitution lead the team to discover Terry, in Miami to record an album; and a dead beached whale, which they remove by blowing it up into smaller pieces.
During their day, Jones and Garcia are repeatedly kidnapped by Ethan (Paul Rudd), a drug lord.
They discover that Spoder was responsible for the terrorist attack, and that he'd teamed up with Ethan to create a drug empire.
Spoder kills Ethan after he reveals he is a small time dealer pretending to be a mob boss, and escapes with the antidote.
The team chase Spoder, who holds them at gunpoint until Jones and Garcia arrive in a Marine helicopter and Spoder surrenders.
Lt. Dangle arrests him.
Wiegel, sitting in the helicopter, accidentally launches a missile at the squad car he is detained in.
The next day, the antidote is distributed, and the Reno Sheriff's Department are congratulated for their actions.
Lt. Dangle accepts a job at the Aspen Sheriff's Department, who'd repeatedly turned him down previously.
The remaining team are offered a flight back to Reno by Terry, revealed to have a rich father, on his private jet.
Back in Reno, Garcia briefs the team on their day's work.
Dangle enters, interrupting the briefing, and explains that Aspen has a strict policy forbidding homosexual sheriffs.
Dangle continues the briefing, and reveals the group have been invited to a convention at Scotland Yard.