During the summer in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, widow Sara Goldfarb (Ellen Burstyn) constantly watches television, particularly infomercials hosted by Tappy Tibbons (Christopher McDonald). After receiving an unexpected phone call that she has won a spot to participate on a television game show, she becomes obsessed with regaining the youthful appearance she possesses in an old photograph from her son Harry's (Jared Leto) graduation many years earlier.
To fit into her old red dress seen in the picture, the favorite one of her deceased husband Seymour, she goes on a crash diet.
To reach her goal sooner, she goes to a doctor to discuss weight loss.
The doctor gives her a prescription for weight-loss amphetamine pills throughout the day and a sedative at night.
Harry warns her about amphetamine dependence and risk of life-threatening consequences, but she rebuffs him and insists that the chance to be on television has given her a reason to live.
As the months go by, Sara's tolerance for the pills adjust and as a result she is no longer able to feel the same high the pills once gave her.
When her invitation has still not arrived, she wrongfully increases her dosage from double to triple and, as a result, begins to suffer from amphetamine psychosis.
Soon, her delusions worsen and she is driven to the brink of madness when she suffers a hallucination that she appears on the game show as the principal subject while being attacked by her monstrous, anthropomorphized refrigerator.
Meanwhile, Sara's son Harry is young and has a promising and adventurous life with his girlfriend Marion Silver (Jennifer Connelly) and best friend Tyrone C. Love (Marlon Wayans). He and his friends are all heroin addicts.
Use of the drug is depicted several times throughout the film with brief sequences that consist of very short shots (approximately a quarter of a second each) of the stages of IV drug use (heating a spoon, cotton ball soaking, blood cells flowing, etc.). The final shot in these short sequences depicts the users' eyes with the pupil rapidly dilating.
Tyrone decides that to support themselves, they should enter the illegal drug trade around Coney Island.
With the promised money, each addict hopes to achieve their dreams: Harry wants to start his own business, Marion wants to open her own boutique of designer clothing and escape her oppressive parents, and Tyrone just wants to move out of his family's low-income neighborhood and honor his late mother's memory.
At first, the trio's drug dealing business thrives.
However, Tyrone is imprisoned after fleeing the scene of a drug-gang assassination and Harry uses most of their earned money to post bail.
Having spent their money, the three find it much more difficult to find heroin.
Escalating drug-baron violence around New York City and rising drug prices make matters worse, which leads to a brutal state of deprivation.
Harry suggests that Marion earn money by having sex with her psychiatrist, which is successful but strains their relationship.
After one of Harry's drug deals goes awry due to unexpected gunfire, he and Marion have a falling out and he leaves her after giving her the number of a pimp who would have access to heroin.
Overnight, he and Tyrone flee the city and decide to travel to Miami to buy wholesale product and make their money back.
After the traumatizing hallucination, Sara immediately flees her apartment and takes a subway to a television studio in Manhattan to confirm when she will be on the show with Tappy Tibbons, yet she is told there is a very long waiting list.
Concerned about Sara's barely stable psychotic state, the staff and the secretary at the studio calls for paramedic assistance, and Sara is involuntarily committed to a psychiatric ward where she undergoes unsuccessful medication treatment.
As a last resort, she is given electroconvulsive therapy, which is also unsuccessful, completely losing her sanity in the process.
On the way to Miami, Harry’s increasingly infected left arm from his daily heroin injections forces them to visit a hospital in Georgia.
A doctor notices the symptoms of drug abuse and Harry and Tyrone are arrested for drug possession.
Tyrone must deal with hard labor, racist prison guards, and drug withdrawal.
Harry is transferred from prison to a hospital to have his arm amputated.
Back in New York, Marion meets with a pimp who supplies her with drugs in exchange for sex and her participation in a private and graphic sex show.
Here, she shamefully partakes in performing degrading sexual acts with another woman while a circle of men watch and throw money at them, while cheering them on.
As the film comes to an end, each character struggles with depression and hopelessness and is shown curling into a fetal position to cope; Tyrone on a cot in jail, Marion on her living room sofa, Harry in his hospital bed sans his left arm, and Sara in her hospital room.
Two of Sara's friends from her apartment building eventually visit her in the hospital, and are so horrified by the near-catatonic Sara, that they hug one another and sob heavily at the bus stop on the way back home.
In the film's final moments, Sara has a dream that she wins the grand prize with her son as the guest of honor.
In her fantasy, Harry is well dressed and successful and he and Marion are engaged.
Sara and Harry tearfully embrace each other under the glowing stage lights while the crowd claps and cheers.