During the London Blitz of World War II, Peter Pan's former playmate, Wendy Darling, has grown up and has two children of her own: a 12-year-old daughter, Jane, and a 4-year-old son, Danny. Her husband Edward is serving in the army, and Jane is resentful of her mother's stories about Peter Pan, dismissing them as childish. The rift is increased between the two when Wendy announces the evacuation of Jane and Danny to the countryside for their protection against the blitz.
Captain Hook sails through the skies of London on his pixie-dust-enchanted ship, and captures Jane mistaking her for Wendy, using her as leverage to gain revenge on Peter Pan. However, the ship is mistaken for a Nazi warplane, and triggers the air raid alert. Hook narrowly escapes back to Neverland while being chased by British and German warplanes. Once in Neverland, Hook plans to feed Jane to the island's octopus in order to draw Peter out of hiding. Peter rescues Jane, and Hook is eaten instead. Though Hook manages to escape, the octopus enjoys his taste (much like Tick-Tock the Crocodile, whom he had finally managed to get rid of long before), and begins hunting him down.
Peter upon finding Jane as Wendy's daughter, assumes she would like to follow in her mother's footsteps. He takes her to his hideout to be mother to the Lost Boys, but Jane refuses, because she is more interested in getting back home. They try to make her have fun and to teach her to fly, but she fails because she does not believe. She blurts out that she does not even believe in fairies, which leaves Tinker Bell slowly dying.
Jane leaves them, and is approached by Hook, who tricks her with a deal. He promises to take her home and lies that he will not harm Peter, and she agrees to help him find his treasure. He gives Jane a whistle to signal him when she locates it. She returns to the Lost Boys to play a game of "treasure hunt", and they try to win her into becoming one of them, so she will believe in fairies and restore Tinker Bell's health. When Jane finds the treasure, Peter and the Lost Boys make her the very first Lost Girl. She has a change of heart and throws Hook's whistle away, but Tootles finds it and, not realizing what it is for, blows it. Hook and his crew arrive, and captures Peter Pan and the Lost Boys, but lets Jane go. Before Peter and the Lost Boys are taken away, Peter warns Jane that Tinker Bell is dying.
Back at the hideout, Jane gets to Tinker Bell too late, but with her new-found belief, she revives her at the last minute. They hurry to Hook's ship, the Jolly Roger, where they find Peter about to walk the plank. Jane saves him, and with the help of "faith, trust, and pixie dust", she learns to fly. Hook grabs Jane, but Peter saves her. He also sinks the ship by sending Hook through the many floors of the ship with the anchor to which he had been tied. Hook and the pirates exit via a rowboat, and is pursued away by the octopus, whom due to sight problem, believes them to be different kinds of fish.
Now that she can fly, Jane returns home to Wendy and Danny. After a tear-filled farewell to the Lost Boys, Peter and Tinker Bell escort her home, with the Lost Boys joining them on their trip. While Jane reconciles with Danny, Wendy and Peter meet again, for the first time in years. Though Peter is disappointed that she has grown up, Wendy assures him that she has not changed. Peter and Tinker Bell bid her fond farewell. As Edward returns home from the army and reunites with his family, Peter Pan, Tinker Bell, and the Lost Boys flies back home to Neverland.