The film opens with a parody of The Godfather at the wedding reception of Lou Pickles and his new wife, Lulu. A mother-child dance during the reception saddens Chuckie Finster, who realizes that he has lived most of his life without his mother, who died shortly after he was born. His father, Chas, shares Chuckie's loneliness.
Tommy Pickles' father, Stu, is summoned to EuroReptarland, a Japanese amusement park in Paris, France, to fix a malfunctioning Reptar robot. Due to a misunderstanding, Tommy, Chuckie, Phil, Lil, Angelica, Dil, their dog Spike and all their parents travel to Paris to take a vacation at the park.
Coco LaBouche, the cold-hearted, child-hating head of EuroReptarland, yearns to be the president of the entire Reptar franchise and its parent company, Yamaguchi Industries, after her employer, Mr. Yamaguchi, resigns as the president. Yamaguchi says that his successor has to love children to be able to do the job, so LaBouche lies to him by claiming to be engaged to a man with a child. Upon the Rugrats' arrival at EuroReptarland, Angelica overhears a conversation between Coco and Yamaguchi before being caught. To save herself, Angelica reveals that Chas is looking for a wife and suggests that Coco marry him.
Coco strikes up a relationship with Chas, but her attempts to bond with Chuckie fail. The adults and babies meet Coco's overworked assistant Kira Watanabe and her daughter, Kimi, who hail from Japan, but are now living in France. Kira helps LaBouche to win Chas' affections. Meanwhile, Spike gets lost in the streets of Paris and falls in love with a stray poodle named Fifi.
Kira tells the babies the origins of Reptar, explaining he was a feared monster until a princess revealed his gentler side to make the frightened humans like him. Chuckie decides the princess should be his new mother, and is aided by his friends to reach an animatronic replica of the princess in the park, but they are stopped by Coco's ninja security guards. At the show's premiere, Angelica informs Coco of Chuckie's wish, so Coco sneaks backstage and takes the spotlight as the princess, luring Chuckie into her arms to make her seem wonderful with children. Chas is thrilled, deciding she would make an excellent mother and decides on the spot to marry her, much to everyone's surprise, including his friends.
On her wedding day, Coco, aided by her accomplice Jean-Claude, kidnaps the children and traps them in a warehouse. Chuckie rallies the children to crash his father's wedding at the Notre Dame cathedral using the Reptar robot. They are chased by Jean-Claude, who pilots Reptar's nemesis, the Robosnail robot. The chase culminates in a fight on a bridge and Chuckie knocks Robosnail into the Seine river. Coco forces Chas to go through with the wedding despite Chuckie's absence, and rushes the Archbishop of Paris until she loses her temper and throws the Bible at him.
Chuckie crashes the wedding, and Coco then pretends to be happy to see Chuckie but Jean-Claude bursts in and accidentally reveals Coco's true nature by announcing that her kidnapping plot had failed. Chas, seeing Coco for the wicked liar she truly is, angrily calls the wedding off. Angelica divulges Coco's plans to Yamaguchi, who is also in attendance, and the former president fires Coco from EuroReptarland. When Coco tries to leave, she realizes the babies are on her wedding train and angrily yanks them off in front of everyone.
Angelica angrily tells Coco that only she can do that and, as Coco leaves the church, Angelica stomps on the wedding dress, ripping it and revealing Coco's underwear. Spike chases the humiliated Coco from the cathedral with Jean-Claude in tow. Kira arrives at the church after having been thrown out of the wedding car earlier and apologizes to Chas for what Coco did to him and Chuckie.
Chas and Kira eventually fall in love and get married. Spike's new girlfriend, Fifi, is adopted by the Finster family. Chuckie gets Kira as a new mother, and Kimi as a new sister. The film ends with a cake fight between the characters and their families.