The movie starts with the Rugrats going on an adventure through the safari, with Tommy impersonating Nigel Thornberry, who is his role model, and spoofing his nature show. However, the babies' broadcast is cut short when they come across a tiger and then a crocodile, both of which threaten them. Just as they begin sinking in quicksand and are nearly attacked, we then reveal that this was only imagination, and that the babies and their families are about to go on vacation on the Lipschitz cruise ship.
However, when the families arrive at the dock, they miss the Lipschitz cruise to their disappointment. As it turns out, Tommy's father, Stu, has rented a ramshackle boat called the S.S. Nancy which he reveals to be their real mode of transportation, and their real vacation. The families are angered that Stu did not consult them on his plans, and soon the boat is flipped over by a wave during a tropical storm, everyone is forced to abandon the ship and board a life raft. Everyone blames Stu for causing all of this to happen and has apparently lost hope of being saved. Things start looking up when Angelica starts singing about having hope on the karaoke machine she brought, until she drops her Cynthia doll she brought into the ocean and starts crying.
The next morning, they end up arriving on a small, seemingly uninhabited island. The adults start arguing about who should be the leader. It gets out of hand so Betty begins an unusual test: she draws a circle around the fighting adults and tells everyone to step out of the circle, saying that it is the bad circle. They all step out and say that they all feel better, except Stu, and make Betty the leader much to Stu's anger. On the opposite side of the island is the famous globe-trotting family: the Thornberrys (out to film a clouded leopard). Tommy, Chuckie, and the rest of the kids, except for Angelica, set off to find them for they suspect they are somewhere on the island. Along the way, Chuckie gets lost and runs into the Thornberry's Tarzan-like child Donnie, who steals Chuckie's clothes.
Meanwhile, Eliza, the gifted Thornberry, is exploring about the jungle and runs into Spike, the Pickles' dog. Since Eliza can talk to animals, Spike (now voiced by Bruce Willis) talks for the first time and he informs her that his 'babies' are lost somewhere on the island. Under the impression that Spike means he is looking for puppies, Eliza (and a reluctant Darwin) agree to help him find them. Following a close encounter with Siri, an angry clouded leopard whom Spike believes to be just a regular domestic cat, they learn that he meant the human babies.
While this is occurring Eliza's father, Nigel, finds the lost babies. He attempts to head in their direction, but ends up tumbling down a hill and suffers amnesia after a coconut falls on his head. Angelica (going by "Angelitiki, the Island Princess") runs into Debbie, the teenage Thornberry, and takes off with Debbie in the Thornberry's all-purpose mobile communication vehicle (commvee). While not paying attention, the two girls sink the commvee. Marianne Thornberry, the mother of Eliza and Debbie as well as the wife of Nigel, formats a plan with the parents to raise the commvee and use the automatic-retrieval system to rescue Nigel, who has regained his memory, and the babies. They succeed, and Nigel and the kids see a giant squid on the way to the surface. They then are reunited with their families, and everyone finally gets on board the Lipschitz cruise. The movie ends with Spike vowing never to lose his babies again.