In Los Angeles, Detective Carter is directing traffic.
Concurrently, Chinese Ambassador Han addresses the importance of fighting the Triads at the World Criminal Court, announcing that he may know the whereabouts of Shy Shen, a semi-mythical individual of great importance to the Chinese mob.
Before announcing, an assassin shoots Han in the shoulder, disrupting the conference.
Chief Inspector Lee pursues the shooter and corners him, discovering that the assassin is his childhood Japanese foster brother Kenji.
When Lee hesitates to shoot Kenji, he makes his escape when Carter (having heard what's happening over the police radio) arrives and tries to intervene.
Lee learns that Han will make a full recovery in the hospital.
Han's daughter, Soo-Yung, now grown up, arrives and makes Lee and Carter promise to capture the one behind the shooting.
On Soo-Yung's insistence, Lee and Carter then go to the Kung Fu studio where Soo-Yung teaches to find an envelope entrusted to her by Han.
They meet the old master, who informs the duo that the Triads took Soo-Yung's belongings, Lee and Carter arrive in the hospital just in time to intercept a gang of French speaking assassins who attempted to kill Soo-Yung and Han.
Lee and Carter defeat the assassins and interrogate one of them with the help of a nun, Sister Agnes, who can speak French.
For her protection, they take Soo-Yung to the French Embassy and leave her under the care of Reynard, the French ambassador and the chairman of the World Criminal Court.
When a car bomb nearly kills Reynard and Soo-Yung, the duo decides to go to Paris to investigate.
In Paris, after undergoing a painful cavity search from Parisian commissioner Revi, Lee and Carter meet with George, a taxi driver, who is prejudiced against Americans.
He drives them to a Triad hideout.
Once there, Lee is seduced by a mob assassin named Jasmine while Carter meets a beautiful woman at a casino table.
Lee and Carter attempt an escape that George finds exhilarating, but are ultimately captured by Kenji's men.
Kenji offers to let them live if the two leave Paris immediately.
While away from Lee, Carter spots and follows the woman he met earlier, learning that she is a stage performer named Genevive.
Meanwhile, Reynard reveals to Lee that Shy Shen is not a person, but a list of the Triad leaders and that Genevive is Han's informant who has access to the list.
After locating Genevive and saving her from an assassination attempt, the two flee to their hotel room where Carter gets intimate with Genevive.
They are attacked by Jasmine and decide to hide out with George who has by now developed a great appreciation for Americans.
Lee and Carter then learn that Genevive is the list.
The names of the thirteen Triad leaders have been tattooed on the back of her head, as per tradition, and Genevive explains that she will be decapitated and buried if the Triads capture her.
When Lee and Carter bring Genevive to Reynard, they find out that he has been working with the Triads all along.
Kenji calls and informs Lee that he has captured Soo-Yung and that he would like to exchange her for Genevive.
Lee arrives at the exchange point, the Jules Verne Restaurant in the Eiffel Tower, with Carter disguised as Genevive.
Kenji challenges Lee to a sword fight, during which the two fall off the tower and into a safety net.
Kenji's sword cuts the safety net open, leaving both men hanging on for dear life.
Not wanting them both to die, Kenji says goodbye to Lee and lets go, only to fall to his death.
Meanwhile, Carter saves Soo-Young and defeats Jasmine.
After escaping, Carter and Lee are confronted by Reynard, holding Genevive hostage and threatening to kill her and frame them.
However, George, who followed Lee and Carter, shoots Reynard from behind.
The police arrive, with Commissioner Revi gloating and trying to get undeserved credit.
After giving him a team punch to the face, Lee and Carter leave the scene dancing to the Edwin Starr song War.