After Amanda Young seals him in the bathroom, Eric Matthews escapes his shackle by breaking his foot with a toilet tank cover.
Six months later, he is still missing.
A SWAT team led by Lieutenant Daniel Rigg discovers the site of a Jigsaw game in which the victim, Troy, had to rip chains from his body in order to escape a bomb.
Rigg calls Detectives Mark Hoffman and Allison Kerry, who is guilt-ridden over Matthews' disappearance, to the scene.
Kerry points out that the door to the room welded shut, breaking Jigsaw's modus operandi of giving his victims a chance to escape.
She is abducted in her home that night while reviewing Troy's tape and awakens in a harness that is hooked into her ribs.
She manages to retrieve the key from a suspended beaker of acid and unlock it before the timer expires, but it tears her rib cage apart anyway, killing her.
Lynn Denlon, a depressed doctor, is abducted from the hospital.
She is brought by Amanda Young to John Kramer, who is now bed-ridden from cancer, and is instructed to keep him alive until the other victim, Jeff, has completed his game.
As Kramer explains the rules, Amanda locks a collar around Lynn's neck that is connected to John's heart rate monitor, and will detonate if he dies or she moves out of range.
Jeff awakens in a box in an abandoned meatpacking plant and learns from a microcassette recorder that he must undergo tests which will lead him to "the man responsible for the loss of his child". Flashbacks show that after his son Dylan was killed by a drunk driver three years ago, Jeff became vengeful and unstable.
As a result, he is now estranged from his wife and neglects his daughter, Corbett.
Jeff follows a trail which leads him to a meat freezer.
Here he finds Danica Scott, the only witness of Dylan's death, who refused to testify in court.
She is naked and chained at the wrists between two poles which begin spraying ice-cold water at random intervals.
Though Danica manages to convince Jeff to help her, she freezes to death before he can retrieve the key.
In the next room he finds Judge Halden, who only sentenced his son's killer to six months in jail.
He is chained at the neck to the bottom of a large vat which begins filling with liquefied pig corpses.
Jeff reluctantly incinerates his son's belongings in order to retrieve the key and saves Halden.
In the third room he finds Timothy Young, his son's killer.
He is strapped to a machine that twists his limbs and neck one by one, until they break.
The key is tied to the trigger of an enclosed shotgun.
Jeff eventually decides to help Timothy, but the shotgun discharges and kills Halden when he retrieves the key, and he is unable to free Timothy before his neck breaks.
Forced at gunpoint by Amanda, Lynn performs an improvised surgery to relieve pressure on John's brain.
He hallucinates about a woman during the surgery and declares his love out loud while pointing at Lynn.
When Amanda leaves, flashbacks show her becoming Kramer's protge, abducting Adam Stanheight prior to the first film and returning a few days later to give Adam a mercy killing out of guilt.
In the present, she reads a letter addressed to her which drives her to hysterics.
After the surgery, Lynn and Kramer speak privately and Lynn admits the ordeal has renewed her appreciation for her family.
Amanda returns to tell Kramer that Jeff has completed his tests, but refuses to remove Lynn's collar and intends to simply kill her.
She reveals that she no longer believes that near death experiences make people appreciate their lives, and her traps including Troy's and Kerry's reflected this.
It is also revealed that she fought with Matthews after he escaped the bathroom, and left him for dead.
After Kramer tries unsuccessfully to get Amanda to let Lynn go, Jeff arrives just as Amanda shoots Lynn in the back.
Jeff retaliates by shooting Amanda in the neck with a gun provided by John during his tests.
As Amanda slowly dies, Kramer sadly reveals that Lynn's game was actually hers: aware of her inescapable traps and unwilling to let a murderer inherit his legacy, he decided to test her will for her subjects to live, and hid the fact that Jeff and Lynn were married, as a result.
After Jeff sees to his wife and tries to shoot Jigsaw with the now empty gun, Kramer offers to call an ambulance for Lynn if Jeff takes one final test to choose between killing Kramer or forgiving him.
After telling Kramer he forgives him he slashes his throat with a power saw.
Before dying, John plays a tape which explains that by killing him, Jeff failed his final test.
The door to the sickroom seals itself as the tape reveals that Corbett is being held captive in a room that only Jigsaw knows the location of, and in order to save her, Jeff must play another game.
The tape ends as John Kramer finally dies, and the collar activates and kills Lynn, leaving Jeff trapped in the sickroom with the three corpses.