Informant Michael Marks wakes up to find a spike-filled mask locked around his neck.
A videotape informs him that he has sixty seconds to remove his eye with a scalpel and retrieve the key, but he cannot bring himself to do so and is killed when the mask closes.
Detective Eric Matthews, is called to the scene by Detective Allison Kerry when a message for him is found.
Although he is initially reluctant to get involved in the case, Eric joins Kerry and Sergeant Daniel Rigg in leading a SWAT team to an abandoned factory.
There they find John Kramer, The Jigsaw Killer, who is weak from cancer, and several computer monitors showing eight people trapped in a house.
Among them are Amanda Young, Jigsaw's only known survivor, and Eric's estranged son Daniel.
A nerve agent filling the house will kill them within two hours, but John assures Eric he will get Daniel back if Eric talks with him until the game is complete.
At Kerry's urging, Eric reluctantly agrees in order to buy time for the tech team to arrive and trace the video signal.
The victims are informed by microcassette that antidotes are hidden throughout the house.
One of which is in the room's safe, and they are given a cryptic clue for the combination.
Xavier ignores a warning note and attempts to use a key on the door, which fires a bullet through the peephole, killing Gus.
When the door opens, the group makes their way to the basement.
A tape for Obi reveals that he helped kidnap the others, which Laura confirms when she recalls her abduction.
While attempting to retrieve two antidotes from the furnace, Obi accidentally activates it and is trapped inside.
The others attempt to rescue him, but to no avail.The next room they enter has an antidote behind a steel door, and a key in a syringe-filled pit.
Xavier, the intended victim, throws Amanda into the pit instead.
She manages to find the key, but Xavier fails to unlock the door in time and abandons the group out of frustration.
Meanwhile, Kramer reveals to Eric that after learning he had cancer, he drove his car off a cliff, but survived, and found a new appreciation for life.
With the little time he has left, John hopes to inspire that change in others by putting them in similar scenarios.
Eric runs out of patience and returns to the monitors.
At Kerry's suggestion, he destroys many of Kramer's documents and sketches, but fails to get a reaction.
As the tech team arrives, John reveals that all of the current victims were framed for various crimes by Eric, and Daniel will be in danger if his identity is discovered.
Xavier returns to the safe room and sees a colored number on Gus's neck.
Now realizing the answer to the clue, he kills Jonas for his number and hunts down the others.
Laura succumbs to the nerve agent after finding another clue revealing Daniel's identity.
Addison abandon him, but Amanda returns after finding Jonas's body.
Addison finds a room with a glass box containing an antidote, but her arms become trapped in the bladed arm holes and Xavier leaves her to die after reading her number.
Amanda and Daniel find a tunnel in the safe room which leads to an underground bathroom, with two rotting corpses.
Daniel collapses just before Xavier finds them.
Amanda notes that he can't read his own number, but he cuts the skin from his neck.
As he approaches them, Daniel suddenly rises and slashes his neck with a hacksaw, killing him.
Having seen Xavier chase Daniel, Eric completely loses his patience and brutally beats Jigsaw, forcing him to lead Eric to the house.
The sitting area is revealed to be a lift and they use it to leave the factory.
The tech team tracks the video's source and Rigg leads his SWAT team to a house where they find VCRs playing previously recorded images.
As Kerry realizes the game took place before they found Kramer, the timer expires and a large safe opens, revealing Daniel bound and breathing into an oxygen mask.
Eric, unaware of any of this, enters the house alone and locates the bathroom, where he is attacked by a pig-masked figure.
He awakens shackled at the ankle to a pipe and a tape recorder, left by Amanda, revealing that she is Kramer's protg and will continue his work after he dies.
She appears in the doorway and seals the door, leaving Eric to die.
Outside, Kramer hears Eric's screams and slowly forms a smile.