During John Kramer's autopsy, a wax-coated microcassette is found in his stomach.
Detective Mark Hoffman is called in to hear the tape, and learns that he will still be tested and the games will continue.
In a mausoleum, two men awaken chained at the neck to a winch.
One's eyes are sewn shut, as is the other's mouth, making communication impossible.
In a panic, the blinded man activates the winch and attacks the muted man, who kills him and frees himself with a key from the blinded mans collar.
Lieutenant Daniel Rigg's SWAT team discovers Allison Kerry's body four days after her death.
Hoffman warns Rigg against breaking through an unsecured door to reach her.
The scene is also investigated by Kerry's contacts, FBI Agents Peter Strahm and Lindsey Perez, who received a key and message from her.
Strahm states that Kerry was killed by an unknown accomplice, noting Kramer's and Amanda Young's physical limitations, and becomes suspicious of Rigg, who has developed an obsession with saving everyone following Eric Matthews' disappearance.
That night, Rigg is attacked in his home and wakes up in his bathroom.
A videotape shows him that Matthews is alive and has ninety minutes to save himself, with Hoffman's life also at risk.
Meanwhile, he must undergo his own tests to face and overcome his obsession.
The detectives are soon shown to be set at each end of a large seesaw: Matthews is held on top of an ice block with a chain noose around his neck and Hoffman is strapped to a chair with electrodes at his feet.
If Matthews slips or too much ice melts, both will die.
A man later arrives to oversee the game.
Rigg's first test involves a pimp, Brenda, who is bound to a chair in his living room.
He is implored to walk away, but accidentally starts the trap by removing her gag, which slowly tears her scalp.
He frees her, but kills her in self-defense when she attacks him with a knife, having previously been told by tape that Rigg would arrest her if she didn't kill him.
The agents investigate the scene and find a clue that leads them to Jill Tuck, Kramer's ex-wife, who is brought to the station for questioning.
Though tight-lipped, she reveals that Kramer was a civil engineer involved with property development, while she ran a clinic to help drug addicts.
They were expecting a son, named Gideon after his first project, but she miscarried after seven months when Cecil Adams, an addict, slammed a door into her stomach while robbing her clinic.
More flashbacks reveal that Cecil later became the subject of Jigsaw's very first test and was killed.
For his next test, Rigg enters a motel and is instructed to abduct the owner, Ivan Landsness, and put him in a prearranged trap in one of the rooms.
After finding photo and video evidence that Landsness is a serial rapist, Rigg forces him into the trap and leaves after handing him two controllers.
Landsness must blind both of his eyes with blades, but blinds only one eye before the timer expires and he is dismembered.
The agents learn that the room was rented out to a lawyer named Art Blank, who vanished two weeks prior.
Blank, the survivor of the mausoleum trap, is revealed to be the man overseeing the game when he prevents Matthews from jumping and gives him a gun.
The third test leads Rigg to a school where he once assaulted a man named Rex, who was accused of domestic abuse.
He and his wife, Morgan, awoke locked in a harness and impaled by spikes, which passed through vital points in his body but non-vital points of hers.
By the time Rigg arrives, Rex has died and Morgan has removed all but one spike, and passed out from shock.
When she awakens Rigg gives her the key to her harness and tells her to free herself.
He finds the location of his final test and pulls the fire alarm as he leaves.
The agents learn at the scene that all three victims were Blank's clients.
They find a puppet with a tape recorder in another room and a cryptic message is played for Perez before the puppet's face explodes, sending shrapnel into her face.
After she is hospitalized, Straham resumes questioning Jill, now convinced that Blank is the accomplice.
He connects her story and a prior clue to the Gideon Meatpacking Plant, the location of Rigg's final test.
Strahm arrives after Rigg and ends up at a make-shift sickroom.
He unlocks it with Kerry's key and finds Jeff, whom he shoots in self-defense when Jeff pulls a gun on him (thinking he knows where his kidnapped daughter is). Meanwhile, Blank pulls out a device which can be used to free them when the timer expires.
If he uses it before then, a pair of pincers will sever his spine.
Rigg finds them and is shot in the chest by Matthews as he breaks into the room, releasing two overhead ice blocks which swing down and crush Matthews' head, killing him.
Hoffman's chair is also lowered into water and he is apparently electrocuted.
Rigg shoots and kills Art Blank, believing he is responsible for the game and mistaking the tape recorder in his hands for a gun.
Just before being shot, Art plays the tape recorder and Rigg learns that his interference caused Matthews' death.
Hoffman, whom was never in danger, reveals himself to be the actual accomplice when he releases himself from the chair unharmed.
After revealing himself, he leaves Rigg to bleed to death from his gunshot wound.
He then seals Strahm in the sickroom before leaving the plant.
The scene then cuts to Kramer's autopsy, which took place after the events of the film.