The films opens with a rock band known as No Vacancy performing at a nightclub.
Dewey Finn creates on-stage antics, including a stage dive that prematurely ends the performance.
The next morning, Dewey wakes in the apartment he lives in with Ned Schneebly and Patty Di Marco.
Ned and Patty pressure Dewey to make up for the share of the rent, which is four months overdue.
When Dewey meets No Vacancy at a rehearsing facility, he finds out that he has been fired and replaced by another musician named Spider.
Later, Dewey answers a phone call from Principal Rosalie Mullins, the principal of the Horace Green prep school, inquiring for Ned about a short-term position as a substitute teacher.
Desperate for money, Dewey impersonates Ned and is hired.
On his first day at the school, Dewey adopts the name "Mr.
S" and spends his first day behaving erratically, much to the class' confusion.
The next day, Dewey overhears a music class and devises a plan to form them into a new band to compete against No Vacancy in a Battle of the Bands tournament.
He casts Zack Mooneyham as lead guitarist, Freddy Jones as drummer, Katie on bass, Lawrence on keyboard, with Tomika, Marta, and Alicia as backup singers while he is lead vocals and guitarist.
He assigns the rest of the class to various roles of groupies, roadies, and the class representative Summer Hathaway as the band manager.
The project takes over normal lessons, but helps the students to embrace their talents and overcome their problems.
Dewey secretly takes key band members out on a fake field trip to sign up for the competition, but they are rejected because the bill is overbooked and Dewey talked with Tomika when she got stage fright and Freddy who had gone out with another band to their van without letting him know.
The children feign a terminal illness, and the kids are allowed in the contest.
Dewey befriends Mullins, who he learns was once fun-loving and free-spirited, but the pressure of being principal and the expectations of the parents turned her into her current self.
Dewey learns that a parent night is scheduled the night before the competition.
Ned receives a paycheck from the school via mail, soon realizing that Dewey is impersonating him.
During the parents' meeting at school, the parents question what Dewey has been teaching the kids.
Ned, Patty, and the cops confront Dewey.
With Mullins bursting in to question what is going on, Dewey reveals his true identity, admits he is not a licensed teacher, causing him to be fired.
Back home, Dewey and Patty fight, while Ned intervenes on behalf.
Finishing the conversation, Ned admits he misses playing music and says that Dewey should move out.
The next morning, Mullins is under pressure by the parents who attended last night's meeting, but the students decide to not let their hard work go to waste, picking up Dewey and attend the competition.
Catching Dewey leaving with the class, Patty calls Mullins, while an intrigued Ned decides to attend the competition.
Mullins and the parents race to the competition just as Dewey and his students take the stage as the School of Rock, and perform "Teacher's Pet", winning over the crowd, including the stunned parents.
While No Vacancy wins, Dewey's old band becomes amazed by Dewey's new one, Summer meets several potential producers, and the audience cheers for School of Rock to perform an encore.
A few weeks later, Dewey and Ned have opened an after school program at their apartment to teach children how to play instruments, while Dewey and the band practice.