Gordon Fleming is the owner of a small asbestos removal company. The stresses of work and being a new father are causing problems between him and his wife, Wendy. He is in a desperate financial bind and makes a bid to remove asbestos from the Danvers State Hospital, closed fifteen years ago, within one week. His team consists of Mike, a law school dropout who is knowledgeable about the asylum's history; Phil, who is filled with bitterness after losing his girlfriend and finds solace in smoking marijuana; Hank, whom Phil lost his girlfriend to; and Jeff, Gordon's nephew, who suffers from severe nyctophobia.
As work begins inside the asylum, Mike finds a box containing nine taped sessions with a patient named Mary Hobbes, who had dissociative identity disorder. The purpose of the sessions, which Mike becomes increasingly engrossed in, is to unveil what happened on Christmas night in Lowell, her hometown, twenty-two years before. One of her personalities, "the Princess", is childlike and innocent, knowing only the Christmas presents - a china doll for Mary and a knife for her brother, Peter - and that they played hide-and-seek after their parents went to bed. Another personality, "Billy", is both childlike and protective. He lives "in the eyes" and saw what happened, but refuses to let Mary find out. The doctor repeatedly asks about the third personality, "Simon", whom "the Princess" knows nothing about and "Billy" fears.
In the tunnels beneath the property, Hank finds a cache of antique Morgan dollar coins and other silver items, scattered from the crematory nearby. He returns that night to steal the artifacts and finds an orbitoclast. He hears odd sounds in the tunnels and discovers an empty peanut butter jar. He hears someone behind him and tries to escape the tunnels, but he is attacked by an unseen assailant. The next morning, the other four learn that Hank abruptly broke up with his girlfriend and left town. Gordon, who frequently calls his wife and saw Phil speaking to two unknown men during one telephone call, suspects that Phil had something to do with Hank's disappearance, causing tension between the group. He later opens up to Phil and admits that he hit Wendy after she accidentally spilled a pot of boiling water on his leg; he has been trying to apologize over the phone ever since.
Phil calls in Craig McManus to replace Hank and tells Mike that he thinks Gordon has become a liability. Jeff finds Hank alive and goes to tell the others, but Hank is gone again when Jeff returns with the others. They split up to find him, but Mike quickly returns to the session tapes. "Billy" refuses to awaken "Simon", admitting to the doctor only that "Simon" was behind whatever happened that night. Phil finds Hank in one of the tunnels, half-naked and wearing sunglasses. The power goes out at that point, trapping Jeff in a pitch-black tunnel and stopping the ninth session tape short. Mike returns the power and the ninth session continues with "Simon", the same voice Gordon has been hearing since the job began, taking over. It is revealed that Peter scared Mary while they were playing and she fell on her doll, breaking it and badly scarring herself. "Simon" then took her over and killed Peter and their parents with the new knife. As the recording continues, Phil finds Gordon in Mary's former room, staring at his own photos stuck to the wall. A shaken Jeff returns to the van, where he is attacked by an unseen assailant.
The next day, Craig arrives at the asylum. Gordon finds Hank, with the orbitoclast protruding from his eye, in one of the larger rooms. Phil is also present and tells Gordon to wake up when Gordon accuses him of attacking the others. As Craig finds them, it is shown that Phil's presence was in Gordon's mind. Possessed by "Simon", Gordon enters a dissociative state and kills Craig with the orbitoclast. It is shown that he attacked Hank that night and, when found by Phil in Mary's room, killed Phil before finding and killing Mike and Jeff. It is also shown that he killed his wife and baby when the pot of boiling water was spilled on him. He breaks down and uses his broken cell phone to apologize to Wendy. The film ends with the doctor asking, "And where do you live, Simon?" and "Simon" answering, "I live in the weak and the wounded, Doc."