The plot follows the story of college student Eun-shik and his efforts to impress a Junior student, Eun-hyo.
Eun-shik has a habit of finding himself in somewhat awkward situations that often embarrass him and sabotage his attempts to impress Eun-hyo.
After a mandatory military service of two years, Eun-shik is transferred to the National University, where he plans to major in Law.
He stays with 3 other roommates; most of them are typical college freshmen who are trying to hit on girls, give a leer at girls in swimming pools, gyms, etc.
Eun-hyo is an aspiring national aerobic athlete.
She first noticed Eun-shik, an awkward weirdo, in the college canteen while he stared at her tightly clasped thighs protruding from her lower mini-skirt.
With a mischievous intentions, she then spread her legs in a jerk, and a glimpse of her white panty made him throw his meal out of his mouth.
Since then their awkward encounters follow.
Although Eun-hyo sympathizes with Eun-shik's one-sided love, she eventually picked one of the hottest guy in college, Sang-ok, who is an apple of every girl eyes.
While having a relationship with another aerobic athlete, Sang-ok spent one night with Eun-hyo, which leads them to accidental pregnancy stage.
As a typical rich spoiled brat, he only offered money to abort the pregnancy.
Dejected, Eun-hyo run away and tried to solve the problem by herself.
The doctor from clinic requires her to accompany someone in charge of her situation to do the procedure.
She then turned to Eun-shik for his help, who initially thought he has got a date to go out with her.
After the procedure, he helped her everything; her post-operational fever, her meals, and such.
He even tried to entertain lest she is upset about her recent breakup.
Finally the day of national aerobic competition came.
Eun-hyo managed to come to the stage in the last minute where she performed to her best.
After the competition, she gave in all her toughness and mentality.
She went to the restroom, cried, and got bleeding from her womb which recently got an abortion operation.
Eun-shik then came in and sent her to hospital.
Out of frustration and deep-seated hatred, he searched Sang-ok who initiated all of this trouble.
He found Sang-ok having a good time after the competition.
He told Sang-ok about Eun-hyo's recent tragedy and punched him in the face.
In the end, Eun-hyo after discharged from hospital, asked Eun-shik if he still remained the same about his feeling toward her.