Ex-con and expert safe-cracker Gary "Gal" Dove (Ray Winstone) has served his time behind bars and happily retired to a Spanish villa with his beloved exporn star wife DeeDee (Amanda Redman). He also has the company of long-time best friend Aitch (Cavan Kendall) and his wife Jackie (Julianne White). Their serene life is shattered by the arrival of an old criminal associate and sociopath Don Logan (Ben Kingsley), who is intent on enlisting Gal in a bank heist back in London.
Organising the heist is Teddy Bass (Ian McShane), a powerful crime lord, who has learned about the bank's vault from Harry (James Fox), the bank's chairman whom he met at an orgy.
Gal politely but firmly declines Logan's many demands to join the heist, but Logan will not back down.
After revealing an obsessive infatuation with Jackie, Logan also makes several unwelcome attempts at reconnecting with her.
Logan eventually grows furious, hurling torrents of verbal abuse at the group while at the same time spitefully painting himself as a victim of their betrayal.
After storming away in a rage, Logan boards a plane back to London, only to be kicked off for refusing to put out his cigarette.
Seething with hatred, Logan returns to Gal's home with menacing intentions, hitting a glass beer bottle into Gal's ear.
DeeDee shoots Don with a shotgun, incapacitating him.
The four friends join in their efforts to kill him, first beating him, stamping on him, shooting him again, and finally crushing his skull.
Hoping to cover up Logan's murder, Gal returns to London to perform the job.
When asked by Bass about Logan's whereabouts, Gal feigns ignorance and claims Logan had called him "from Heathrow". However, Bass is visibly suspicious, and Gal's anxieties mount.
During the heist, Bass' crew use surface-supplied diving gear to drill into Harry's bank vault from a pool in a neighbouring bath house.
The water from the pool floods the vault and shorts its security system.
While helping to empty the vault's safe deposit boxes, Gal secretly pockets a pair of large ruby earrings encrusted with diamonds.
After the job is successfully completed, Gal's lack of celebration further raises Bass' suspicions.
Bass offers Gal a ride to the airport, but along the way, stops by Harry's home.
Inside, Bass kills Harry in cold blood and immediately and pointedly questions Gal again about Logan.
Gal merely responds, "I'm not into this any more." Back in the car, Bass suggests he knows what happened to Logan, saying, "Spain, eh? I must drop in sometime.
Pay my respects." He gives Gal 10 in payment for his services, tells him to get out of the car and drives away, leaving Gal to his own devices.
In the final scene, back in Spain, Gal is again home surrounded by his friends and by DeeDee, who is seen wearing the ruby-diamond earrings that he stole.
It is also revealed that Logan lies buried under the double-heart insignia at the bottom of their pool.