Shaun (Simon Pegg) is a 29-year-old electronics shop salesman with no direction in life.
His younger colleagues don't respect him.
He has an estranged relationship with his stepfather, Phillip (Bill Nighy). His housemate Pete (Peter Serafinowicz) is fed up with Ed (Nick Frost), Shaun's vulgar, unemployed best friend.
Furthermore, Shaun's girlfriend Liz (Kate Ashfield) is unhappy with their social life as they spend every date at Shaun and Ed's favourite pub, the Winchester.
Because Shaun always brings Ed, Liz is always forced to bring her flatmates, David (Dylan Moran) and Dianne (Lucy Davis). Shaun promises Liz that he will change.
After a bad day at work, Shaun forgets to book a table at the restaurant he promised Liz they would go to, to (belatedly) celebrate their anniversary.
When he suggests the Winchester for the date, an angry Liz breaks up with him.
Shaun drowns his sorrows with Ed at the Winchester.
<<<<<<< HEAD
As the two play music at home, an enraged Pete  suffering from a bite wound on his way to work  confronts Shaun on his flaws, telling him to sort his life out.
=======
As the two play music at home, an enraged Pete — suffering from a bite wound on his way to work — confronts Shaun on his flaws, telling him to sort his life out.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
The next morning, a zombie apocalypse has overwhelmed the city, but Shaun doesn't notice due to his hangover.
He and Ed see a woman in their backyard, and quickly learn that she is a zombie.
Another zombie makes its way into the garden, and Shaun and Ed run back inside.
They learn more about the outbreak by watching the news.
They kill the two zombies (and another that walked through the front door) with blows to the head.
They briefly discuss and plan to rescue Shaun's mother, Barbara (Penelope Wilton), and Liz, then wait out the crisis in the Winchester.
Shaun and Ed escape in Pete's car and pick up Barbara and Phillip who has been bitten.
They head over to Liz's flat and collect her, with Diane and David reluctantly tagging along.
On their way to the Winchester, Phillip makes peace with Shaun, dies from his bites, and then reanimates.
The group abandon the vehicle and continue on foot.
The streets surrounding the pub are overrun, so the group pretends to be zombies to sneak past them.
Outside the Winchester, Shaun gets into an argument with Ed and alert the zombies.
Shaun leads the horde away while the rest take refuge in the pub.
Shaun rejoins them after losing the zombies.
Several hours later, the zombies return; Shaun discovers the Winchester rifle above the bar is functional and the group uses it to defend themselves.
Barbara reveals she was bitten along the way and dies, and a distraught Shaun is forced to shoot her after she reanimates.
David is then pulled through a window and torn apart by the zombies.
Dianne rushes out to rescue him, disappearing into the advancing horde.
Pete arrives as one of the zombies and bites Ed; Shaun kills Pete and sets fire to the bar, but the fire also sets off the remaining rifle ammunition.
The remaining survivors, Shaun, Liz and Ed, flee into the cellar and contemplate suicide, but discover a barrel hatch elevator that opens to the outside.
Shaun and Liz escape on the elevator as a wounded Ed is left behind with the rifle.
Back on the street, the British Army arrives and guns down the remaining zombies, rescuing the two.
The couple approach the safety of the trucks, reconciled.
Six months after the outbreak, civilization has returned to normal, with the zombies now used as cheap labour and entertainment.
Liz has moved in with Shaun, and Shaun keeps zombified Ed tethered in the backyard shed so they can play video games together.