Viola Hastings (Amanda Bynes) is a smart-mouthed teenage high school soccer player at Cornwall, which suddenly cuts its girls' team.
After her request to join the boys' team is refused by the sexist coach, she finds a way to play for Cornwall's rivals, Illyria, an elite boarding school team that her twin brother, Sebastian (James Kirk), is supposed to enroll at as a new student.
However, he is hoping to go to a contest in London with his fledgling band, so he asks Viola to cover for him by telling the school that he is sick.
She agrees but, unbeknownst to him, decides to pass herself off as Sebastian instead, in hopes of beating Cornwall and humiliating her cocky ex-boyfriend, Justin (Robert Hoffman). With the help of her stylist friend, Paul (Jonathan Sadowski), she is transformed into "Sebastian" and joins Illyria in his place.
While moving in, she meets her roommate, Duke Orsino (Channing Tatum), a good-looking striker on the soccer team who she soon gets a crush on.
That week after tryouts, Viola is assigned to second string, much to her dismay.
Meanwhile, "Sebastian's" lab partner, Olivia (Laura Ramsey), develops a crush on him, which frustrates Duke since he likes her.
In exchange for "Sebastian's" help in getting Olivia's attention, Duke agrees to put in extra soccer practice time with him.
Coach Dinklage eventually moves "Sebastian" up to first string, and he is delighted.
"Sebastian" is reminded, by a message from his mother, about the Junior League carnival that the siblings promised to attend.
Due to the fact that Duke's mother is also a part of the Junior League, he must go as well.
"Sebastian" is forced to switch between herself (Viola) and Sebastian the whole time, while trying to avoid her mother and Monique, Sebastian's ex-girlfriend, so that she is not discovered as impersonating her brother.
Viola is trying to run around and do both her and her brother's jobs at the carnival.
Duke misses his chance with Olivia when her shift is up at the kissing booth.
He is not disappointed by her replacement, who turns out to be "Sebastian's" sister, Viola.
Duke and Viola meet for the first time and exchange their kiss at the kissing booth, only to be interrupted by Viola's ex-boyfriend, Justin.
Duke and Justin get into a fight and decide they will finish the battle on the soccer field.
Duke realizes he might be crushing not only on Olivia, but on Viola as well.
Olivia goes on a date with Duke to make "Sebastian" jealous, remaining far more interested in him than in Duke.
Encouraged by Viola, she decides to go directly to Sebastian and tell him how she feels.
The plot becomes complicated when the real Sebastian returns from London a day early.
When he arrives at Illyria, Olivia runs up and kisses him.
Duke, seeing this, believes his roommate has betrayed him and after arguing with "Sebastian" kicks him out.
Viola stays in Eunice's room and oversleeps, causing the real Sebastian to wind up on the pitch playing in what should be his sister's spot in the next day's much-anticipated game against Cornwall.
Principal Gold (David Cross), who has been told of Viola's impersonating Sebastian by Malcolm and Sebastian's ex-girlfriend, Monique, he halts the game and informs the crowd that Sebastian is a girl.
The real Sebastian being present instead, he proves himself to be male by pulling down his shorts and exposing his genitals (off-screen). At half-time, Viola explains the situation to Sebastian and they switch places again.
Later on in the game Viola explains that she has been impersonating her brother, finally convincing Duke and everyone else by showing them her breasts (again, off screen). The coach (Vinnie Jones) agrees to let Viola keep playing anyway, sternly informing the Cornwall coach that Illyria doesn't discriminate based on gender and he calls out the coach for his sexist ways.
Illyria wins the game on a penalty kick when Viola scores a goal (after a save and then pass from Duke), finally humiliating Justin and the rest of the Cornwall boys.
Everyone at Illyria celebrates their victory over Cornwall, except for Duke who is hurt at Viola's deception.
She invites Duke to her debutante ball, but she leaves as he doesn't show.
Whilst in the garden, Duke turns up and they head to the debutante ball, where they are introduced, come on stage, and kiss.
Monique and Justin come on stage together followed by Olivia and Sebastian.
At the end of the film, Viola and Duke are shown playing on the soccer team of Illyria, both on first string.