Dr. Theodore "Ted" Brooks (Cuba Gooding, Jr.) is a dentist in Miami, Florida. Every city bus carries an advertisement for his dental practice with his picture.
One day, Ted receives a letter from Alaska, naming him as the only heir of one Lucy Watkins, a resident of the backwoods village of Tolkeetna. Brooks' mother Amelia (Nichelle Nichols) reveals that he is adopted; Lucy was his biological mother.
Ted travels to Tolkeetna to claim his inheritance from Lucy: seven Siberian Husky sled dogs and a Border Collie named Nana.
In Tolkeetna, he discovers his roots. Totally out of his element, Ted experiences challenges he has never dreamed of: blizzards, thin ice, foxes, skunks, bears, an intimidating, crusty old mountain man named James "Thunder Jack" Johnson (James Coburn), and the aggressive, defiant lead dog, Demon. All of this happens with the buzzing excitement of the Arctic Challenge Sled Dog Race, which is only two weeks away.
Ted tries to find out why he was given up for adoption, and who was his biological father. He meets bar owner Barb (Joanna Bacalso), a close friend of Lucy. Barb helps Ted to deal with the dogs and teaches him how to drive a sled, and falls in love with him. Ted has several encounters with Thunder Jack, who tries to buy the dogs, especially Demon. Barb tells Brooks that Thunder Jack is his biological father.
Ted confronts Thunder Jack, who offers to tell the truth about of Ted's birth in exchange for the dogs; Ted agrees. Jack takes Brooks to a cave out in the woods. During an Arctic Challenge, he and Lucy were stranded in that cave, and it was there that Ted was conceived. The next morning, when Thunder Jack woke up, Lucy was gone. He looked for her but never found her. Ted returns to Miami.
Thunder Jack adds Demon as lead dog of his team for the Arctic Challenge. Jack has finished last in the last three Challenges, "winning" the "Arctic Flame" award as last "musher" to cross the finish line. The other mushers all camp at a checkpoint to wait out a bad storm, but Jack presses on. (He is annoyed by the pretensions of defending champion Olivier (Jean Michel Paré), who is dining on crab legs in an elaborate tent.)
In Miami, Ted recounts his experiences to his mother, who accidentally breaks a frame holding a picture of Lucy and Demon. This reveals a snapshot of Lucy and Jack with a baby. Ted is infuriated that Jack lied to him, and rushes back to Alaska.
There he learns that Jack is lost on the trail, and the weather is too bad for searching. Ted decides to go searching himself, taking Lucy's dogs with Nana as lead. As he heads back down the trail, he nearly collides with Olivier, who wins the Challenge again.
A few hours later, Amelia arrives and meets Barb. She learns that Ted is out on the trail, searching for Jack. The "Arctic Flame" is burning over the finish line, until the last musher arrives.
Ted eventually locates Thunder Jack in the old cave. Jack admits he and Lucy had been together when Ted was born, and that he loved her. But he and Lucy had agreed then that neither one of them could raise a baby. Ted also discovers that Demon is bad-tempered because he has a bad tooth. He pulls the tooth and Demon becomes friendly (despite keeping his name). During the journey back to Tolkeetna, the sled nearly goes over a cliff into a river, but the dogs pull themselves back up. Ted finally brings Thunder Jack across the finish line.
Ted introduces Thunder Jack to Amelia, and Brooks and Thunder Jack decide to share the "Arctic Flame" trophy.
Sometime later, Ted and Barb are married.
In an epilogue, Ted has moved his dental practice to Tolkeetna. Barb has become his receptionist and is pregnant, and Nana and Demon have four puppies named Avalanche, Little Aleutia, Chinook, & Demon Jr..
Back in Miami, Ted's cousin Rupert (Sisqó), also a dentist, is the new celebrity dentist, with his face on every city bus.