DJ Williams (Columbus Short) is a young man in inner-city Los Angeles.
He and his younger brother Duron (Chris Brown) compete in local dance competitions as members of a crew known as the "Goon Squad". During the battle there are backs and forths, but in the end of the battle the Goon Squad win a cash-prize, and the leader of the rival crew goes all in for a double or nothing battle,which DJ accepts much to the dismay of his brother who knows that if the opposing crew leader thinks he got hustled the crew won't be able to spend the money they win, the Goon Squad wins the second battle and the losing home crew responds by ambushing DJ and his crewmates after the show.
A fight breaks out, and the leader of the rival crew starts beating up DJ.
Duron pushes him away and starts fighting him, leading the rival to pull out a gun and shoot Duron, killing him.
Arrested for assault, DJ is subsequently sent by his mother to live with his aunt Jackie (Valerie Pettiford) and uncle Nate (Harry J. Lennix) in Atlanta, Georgia, where he is to attend historically black Truth University.
Nate, the physical plant director at Truth, aims to teach DJ responsibility and puts him to work doing maintenance as part of a work-study program.
DJ sees April Palmer (Meagan Good), to whom he is immediately attracted.
After registration, he moves into his dorm room, where he meets his new roommate Rich Brown (Ne-Yo). Rich meets DJ at a stepping competition on the green between the Truth chapters of rival fraternities Theta Nu Theta and Mu Gamma Xi.
The Mu Gamma Xi crew, seven-time national stepping champions, easily steals the show until DJ sees April across the way and runs right through their step line in an attempt to speak to her.
That night, Rich and his friends go out to a local club called the Phoenix and invite DJ along.
Hoping to impress April and upstage Grant and the Gammas (all of whom are also in attendance), DJ takes to the floor.
Despite the animosity between DJ and Grant, the Gammas recognize his skills as a dancer and their chapter president Zeke (Laz Alonso) invites him to pledge for Mu Gamma Xi.
DJ turns down both Zeke's offer as well as an offer from the Theta Nu Theta chapter's leader Sylvester (Brian White).
After learning that April is a student history tutor, DJ signs himself up for tutoring so that he can spend time with her.
The two slowly begin a friendship and DJ takes April out to dinner.
During their date, April discusses the importance of black fraternities and sororities with DJ, and tells him to visit Heritage Hall on the campus' Greek Row.
The next day, DJ learns about the significant number of African-American historical figures and celebrities who were members of various Greek-letter organizations, and decides to pledge for the Theta chapter along with Rich and their friend Noel (Jermaine Williams). After "crossing over" to become official Theta members, DJ, Rich, and Noel join the Thetas' step crew.
While having dinner, April breaks up with Grant due to his chauvinistic attitude and his failure to know anything about her, particularly that green is her favorite color.
She grows closer to DJ and they eventually become a couple.
While at practice, DJ, Rich, Noel and other new members realize the step dance moves are old fashion and aren't good enough to win the stepping competition.
So they decide to take the time to learn fresher moves.
Sly then gathers his older member and challenges DJ and the rest to an old school vs.
new school stepping contest.
DJ's team loses the contest due to his showboating.
They remind DJ, much like Duron did earlier in the film, that it is about the team and not about him.
DJ apologizes to the entire fraternity and is quickly forgiven.
Sly also requests DJ to show the team some of his moves.
A few days before the competition, Grant stumbles upon DJ's file and discovers his assault record and presents it to the board.
The board then decide to suspend DJ for not disclosing his criminal record.
Dr. Palmer, who is April's father, calls in DJ to his office.
He was willing to uplift his suspension on the condition that he is to no longer date April.
DJ declines the ultimatum and walks away.
DJ then tells Nate and Jackie about the suspension.
They then reveal that Jackie dated Dr.
Palmer until she met Nate and there has been some animosity between Nate and Palmer ever since.
Jackie confronts Dr.
Palmer about DJ's suspension and Palmer claims he was only protecting April.
April then confronted her father and warns him that because of his pride, it could lead her to walk out of his life.
DJ's suspension was finally uplifted and he rejoins the Thetas to compete alongside them against the Gammas in the stepping competition.
Both teams were tied at the end and it was bought into sudden death rules to determine a winner.
Unknown to DJ and the Thetas, the Gammas had recorded DJ practicing his moves prior to the competition.
Going first, Grant does DJ's exact routine from the videotape.
After he finishes, DJ matches Grant move for move, but tosses in something the Gammas didn't get on tape.
The Thetas finally defeats the Gammas.
April goes on stage to hug and kiss DJ as the team celebrates the victory.