Three years after the first film, Stuart and George become older brothers to their baby sister, Martha. Stuart later questions his ability after a grueling soccer match alongside George, who kicked him with a soccer ball. He becomes even more downhearted after George's model airplane gets broken in an accident because of him. However, Stuart's father, Frederick Little, tells him that for every Little, every cloud has a "silver lining", a good thing that comes out of an apparently bad situation.
On his way home from school, Stuart saves a canary named Margalo from a peregrine falcon named Falcon, and they become friends. However, Margalo is secretly assisting Falcon to steal from households after earning the homeowners' trust. When he tells her to find and take an object of value, or lose the sanctuary he promised her, she can't seem to concentrate on her assignment, as she is beginning to fall in love with Stuart. Falcon eventually loses patience and threatens to eat Stuart alive unless Margalo gives him the ring, which she doesn't. Worried for his safety, she takes Eleanor Little's wedding ring.
When the Littles discover that the ring is missing, they think it has fallen down the sink drain. Stuart offers to be lowered down the drain on a string to get it, but is unable to retrieve it after the string breaks. A guilty Margalo saves him, then leaves the Little house the following night after overhearing Frederick and Eleanor talk about Stuart's safety. Upon realizing Margalo's disappearance, Stuart assumes she has been kidnapped by Falcon and leaves to rescue her with the household's reluctant cat Snowbell.
Stuart and Snowbell enlist the help of Monty, Snowbell's old friend, who tells them that Falcon's headquarters is at the disused observation deck of the nearby Pishkin Building. They attach a balloon to a popcorn box to get Stuart to the top, where he finds out that Margalo is Falcon's slave and was forced to take the ring. Stuart tries to save her, but Falcon captures him and drops him onto the street. Luckily, Stuart is accidentally saved by a passing garbage truck, unbeknownst to either Falcon and Margalo. Falcon then shuts Margalo inside a paint can as punishment for rebelling against him. Meanwhile, Snowbell makes his way to the top of the building while the Falcon is absent and frees Margalo, who tearfully tells Snowbell that Falcon killed Stuart. A distraught and outraged Snowbell vows revenge.
On a garbage barge where he has ended up, Stuart blames himself for everything and almost loses hope before finding George's broken model airplane. Realizing this is a "silver lining", he fixes it and uses it to fly back to the Pishkin Building. Meanwhile, the Littles have now discovered that George has been lying and angrily demand to know where Stuart is, and they want the truth. Frederick reveals that it is never okay for George to lie to his parents. George tries not to break Stuart's promise to his parents, but Frederick reveals that since he has a brother, whatever he promised him, and if he was in danger that should matter more to him than the promise. Eleanor asks George how he would feel, and how they all would feel if anything happened to Stuart. George then confesses that Stuart's at the Pishkin Building but is in big trouble for lying, and the family heads out to the location. Meanwhile, as Snowbell frees Margalo, Falcon returns and tries to kill Snowbell, but Margalo distracts him by taking the ring and fleeing, allowing Falcon to give chase. Stuart catches up in the plane and saves Margalo. The Littles follow him by taxi as he begins flying through the park, with Falcon pursuing him.
Eventually, Falcon grabs the plane and detaches the upper wing, causing it to enter a steep nose dive, but Stuart recovers from the dive. Realizing that Falcon will never give up, Stuart lets Margalo off, then flies the plane in a kamikaze run while Falcon goes into an attack dive. He uses Eleanor's ring to temporarily blind him and jumps out using a bandana as a parachute. Falcon is struck by the plane and defeated. Stuart falls when his parachute is sliced apart by the plane's propeller, but is rescued by Margalo. Although Falcon survives being struck, he is injured and falls out of the sky, landing in a garbage can next to Monty, who apparently devours him after saying to the sky, "Thank you!".
Stuart is congratulated by his family, and Margalo gives Eleanor her ring back, while Snowbell reunites with them as well. Sometime later, Margalo says goodbye to the Littles and leaves with the other birds to migrate south for the winter, which she had always wanted to do but couldn't due to Falcon's influence. When Frederick asks Stuart what the "silver lining" of this event is, he responds that Margalo will be back in the spring and Martha says her first words: "Bye bye, birdie." The family celebrates the occasion before heading into the comfort of their home.