Sydney White (Amanda Bynes) is the daughter of a plumber, Paul White (John Schneider). Her mother, a Kappa Sorority member, died when Sydney was still young.
She sets off to attend college at SAU and pledge to her mother's once dignified sorority.
There she meets Demetria Rosemead Hotchkiss (Crystal Hunt), known as Dinky, also an upcoming member of the Kappa Sorority, and the two quickly become friends.
While on their way to their dorm, she meets Tyler Prince (Matt Long), the president of a popular fraternity, who is also the on-off boyfriend of the tyrannical president of the student council and the head of the Kappa Sorority, Rachel Witchburn (Sara Paxton). Rachel checks out her university's website that ranks the "hottest" in the school several times a day, and is always number one on the list.
Tyler meets Sydney and is immediately smitten.
Since Sydney and Dinky's mothers were Kappas, they survived the rush and were accepted as legacies.
However, they need to survive the pledging.
Sydney's tomboyish upbringing proves to be an asset as she stands out among the other girls and manages to overcome the difficult initiation tasks.
She also unintentionally inspires the other girls to innocently defy shallow things that Rachel teaches them.
This unique personality gradually propels Sydney's popularity as seen on the university website.
Rachel gets increasingly jealous of her because of this.
As one of the Kappa Sorority's traditional rituals, the freshmen need to find a date late at midnight.
Sydney finds Lenny (Jack Carpenter), one of the seven dorks who live in a run-down house known as the Vortex.
Sydney is then picked by Rachel to ditch her date, which ended in Lenny paying.
Sydney fails to become a member of Kappa when Rachel humiliates her in the pledge gala and insists she has disobeyed the rules: lying about her background and cheating on a Kappa quiz.
Sydney leaves that night in the rain, unintentionally sitting in front of the Vortex.
She is welcomed by the seven dorks: Lenny, the one with high maintenance health; Terrence (Jeremy Howard), the genius one; Jeremy (Adam Hendershott), the shy one who only uses his puppet to talk; Gurkin (Danny Strong), the hot-tempered blogger; Spanky (Samm Levine), the one who has no experience with girls; George (Arnie Pantoja), the childlike one who still believes in Santa Claus and doesn't know how to tie a knot; and Embelakbo Akapaktumbe also known as "Embele" (Dont Bonner), a Nigerian interchange student who is highly intelligent but has sleep disorder due to being un-adapted to a different time zone.
The Vortex is coincidentally the target of Rachel's plan to open a luxury center that will benefit only the top Greek sororities and fraternities.
She plans to subject it to a planned demolition, which is something Tyler is opposed to after he gets to know Sydney and her housemates better.
Sydney, together with the seven dorks, tries to bring Rachel down from her student council position by running Terrence for president.
He is soon disqualified because he had already graduated six years prior, as revealed when Rachel humiliated the group at a party.
Sydney replaces him as a presidential candidate and starts her campaign.
Unlike Rachel's views that promote elitism and exclusivism based solely on popularity and appearances, Sydney and the dorks believe in accepting diversity and equality.
This earns Sydney respect from different cliques, and she gets the number one rank on the school's "hottest" website, which infuriates Rachel.
The day before the debate and election, Rachel hires a hacker to destroy Sydney's files using a virus called 'The Poison Apple.' Sydney is then forced to stay up all night in the library doing her work on Gurkin's laptop.
When Sydney finishes her work, she accidentally falls asleep and is almost disqualified for not showing up, but Tyler wakes her with a kiss just in time.
After Rachel answers the question posed by Professor Carleton (Brian Patrick Clarke), Sydney's supporters arrive, led by a goth girl (Kierstin Koppel) whose group is devoted to Gurkin's blog.
Sydney's speech defends the underrated people, including dorks, and concludes by stating that she herself is a dork.
This incites a number of students to also admit dork status including Tyler, Jeremy, Spanky and Dinky.
Sydney wins the debate and the election, becoming the new president, while Rachel is stripped of her Kappa sisterhood by her sisters because of her cruelty to them.
The film ends with Sydney's father and other construction workers fixing the Vortex.
New relationships have formed as well -- Dinky and Lenny are now a couple (who bonded because of their sensitive digestive system), Spanky is finally getting some girls, the Goth girl and Gurkin are dating, and Sydney and Tyler are together.
George has learned how to tie a knot, Jeremy is finally coming out of his shell, and Terrence has become a millionaire because of his theory (He sold his theory {the predictive analytic probability theory that he finally perfected and can predict anything from the behavior of amino acids in a stable isotope peptide bond to the outcome of sporting events} to ibet.com for $10 million). And, according to Sydney's narration, they all lived "dorkily ever after".