Ryu (Shin Ha-kyun), is a deaf-mute man working in a factory. His ailing sister (Im Ji-eun) is in desperate need of a kidney transplant, but Ryu's is not a match. After he is laid off from his job, Ryu takes his severance money and contacts a black market organ dealer to exchange one of his kidneys for one that his sister can use. The dealers disappear after taking Ryu's kidney and money. Three weeks later, Ryu learns from his doctor that a donor has been found, but he is unable to afford the operation.
To get money for the operation, Yeong-mi (Bae Doona), Ryu's radical anarchist girlfriend, suggests kidnapping the daughter of an executive that fired Ryu. They kidnap Yu-sun (Bo-bae Han), the daughter of Dong-jin (Song Kang-ho). The girl stays with Ryu's sister, who believes Ryu is merely babysitting her. Ryu and Yeong-mi successfully collects the ransom from Dong-jin. However, his sister discovers the plan and commits suicide to stop being a burden to him. Ryu takes Yu-sun and his sister's body to a suburban riverbed they used to frequent as children, and begins to bury her. Distracted by the burial and unable to hear, Ryu is unaware when Yu-sun slips into the river, and she drowns.
As Dong-jin mourns his daughter, he hires an investigator to find her kidnappers. Dong-jin finds Yeong-mi and tortures her. Yeong-mi apologizes for Yu-sun's death, but warns Dong-jin that her friends (a terrorist group) will kill him if she dies. Unfazed by the threats, Dong-jin electrocutes her. Meanwhile, Ryu locates and murders the organ dealers. He returns to Yeong-mi's apartment and sees the police removing her corpse.
Ryu and Dong-jin wait at each other's residence in an attempt to kill the other. Ryu, being the first to return home, is knocked unconscious by Dong-jin's booby trap. Dong-jin takes Ryu to the riverbed where his daughter died. He slashes Ryu's Achilles tendons and waits for Ryu to bleed to death.
After dismembering Ryu's corpse, Dong-jin begins to dig a hole, but a group of men arrives. After surrounding and stabbing Dong-jin, one man pins a note to his chest with a knife. The note reveals them to be Yeong-mi's friends. The group then leaves Dong-jin dying next to the bloody tools and bags containing Ryu's body parts.