The movie begins in Manhattan, three years after the first movie, where the Cheetah Girls have just completed their junior year and are performing at a Graduation Party for the Manhattan Magnet's Class of 2006 ("The Party's Just Begun").
Later while having a sleep-over/Chinese food night at Galleria's (Raven-Symon), Chanel (Adrienne Bailon) tells the girls that her mother, Juanita (Lori Anne Alter), is planning a trip to Barcelona, Spain, where they will be visiting Luc (Abel Folk), Juanita's boyfriend.
Chanel is bummed and does not want to see Luc while the other girls are upset about being separated for the summer when Aquanette (Kiely Williams) sees a shooting star and the girls make a wish together - to go to Spain with Chanel.
At that very moment, one of the girl's magazines flips pages until it comes across an ad for a Barcelona music festival.
Galleria enters the Cheetah Girls and the next day, her mother Dorethea (Lynn Whitfield), Juanita, and the Cheetah Girls all travel to Spain.
When the girls arrive in Barcelona, they do some shopping before resting in a Cafe.
Soon they hear a guitar playing and meet Angel (Peter Vives), a mysterious guitar player who accompanies them around Barcelona as they sing to the entire city, and he becomes Galleria's love interest ("Strut").
The next day the girls audition for the festival and earn a spot ("Cheetah Sisters (Barcelona Mix)").
The next day at breakfast, they meet Joaquin (Golan Yosef), a count, Luc's godson, and a handsome dancer who becomes a love interest for Dorinda (Sabrina Bryan). The next day after Dorinda finds out Joaquin is a dancer, she goes to his studio, where he teaches her tango ("Dance With Me").
That night Joaquin takes the Cheetahs to the Dancing Cat, a local Spanish night club where all the new artists perform their songs ("Why Wait")("A La Nanita Nana").
There they meet and befriended Marisol (Belinda), a Spanish pop star, beloved by all of Barcelona, and who will also compete in the Music Festival, and her manager/mother, Lola (Kim Manning), who appears nice and wins the Cheetah Girls' affection, but secretly plans a scheme to break up the Cheetah Girls, as they pose a threat to her daughter's chances in the competition, and she starts making Marisol take Chanel away from The Cheetah Girls.
Meanwhile, Aqua and Dorothea have been designing clothes with Dorothea's old friends, Juanita is trying to get a proposal out of Luc, Dorinda is teaching hip hop to Joaquin's class, and Galleria is the only one focused on the competition, as she is writing a song called, "Amigas Cheetahs", which they will sing at the competition ("Do Your Own Thing").
Galleria notices that everyone is getting involved in other activities except for her ("It's Over"), and eventually decided to take a train to Paris, where she can meet up with her father, Francobollo, and he will take her back home to Manhattan.
While at a train station, the other three girls find Galleria and sing the starting sequence of "Amigas Cheetahs", and Galleria says she will only come back if they stay focused.
While Chanel walked around the house, she overhears Juanita talking to Dorothea about how she believes that Luc doesn't want to marry her because Chanel doesn't like him.
Luc later proposes to Juanita, after Chanel gives him permission, and she gladly accepts.
Luc tells Chanel that she can stay in New York with her friends for her upcoming senior year.
However, the Cheetah Girls' dreams are in serious trouble.
Lola asks the Cheetah Girls to perform at The Dancing Cat.
She then convinces the Dancing Cat's manager to pay the Cheetah Girls money.
The competition will only allow amateur performs to compete.
Accepting payment from the Dancing Cat makes the Cheetah Girls professional performers.
However they gave the money back and Angel, who was present during the entire exchange, investigates.
Lola suggests that since the Cheetah Girls cannot perform as a group, Chanel should perform with Marisol instead since they can both sing in Spanish.
Right before Chanel is going to get changed to perform with Marisol, the Festival Director informs that the Cheetah Girls are able to perform after getting a tip.
Everyone is surprised when they see that the informer was his nephew, Angel.
He informed that Lola tried to sabotage the Cheetahs, and his uncle reinstates the girls as the Cheetah Girls.
Lola tries to dispute, but the Director will not hear it.
Marisol finally tells off her mother, saying she is quitting the competition because she loves to sing and not to be famous, and her mother is just desperate to make her a star.
The Cheetah Girls then perform "Amigas Cheetahs", and as a surprise, bring Marisol onto the stage (where Lola sees how happy her daughter finally is), along with Joaquin's dancing crew, Angel on the guitar and the Director on the trumpet.
Their song is a hit with the crowd.
An alternate ending concludes after this, where Juanita and Luc are having their wedding, and with everybody enjoying themselves ("Cherish the Moment"). (This scene is not shown in both TV or sing along versions.)