On an expedition in Antarctica, paleoclimatologist Jack Hall and his colleagues Frank and Jason are drilling for ice-core samples on the Larsen Ice Shelf for the NOAA when the shelf breaks off. Later, Jack presents his findings on global warming at a United Nations conference in New Delhi, but fails to convince diplomats or Vice President of the United States Raymond Becker. However, Professor Terry Rapson of the Hedland Climate Research Centre in Scotland believes in Jack's theories. Several buoys in the North Atlantic simultaneously show a massive drop in the ocean temperature, and Rapson concludes that melting polar ice has started to disrupt the North Atlantic current. He contacts Jack, whose paleoclimatological weather model shows how climate changes caused the first Ice Age. His team, along with NASA's meteorologist Janet Tokada, builds a forecast model.
Across the world, violent weather causes mass destruction. U.S. President Blake authorizes the FAA to suspend all air traffic due to severe turbulence. At the International Space Station (ISS) three astronauts see a huge storm system spanning the northern hemisphere, which soon develops into three massive hurricane-like super storms. The eyes of these storms hold temperatures of −150 °F (−101 °C), instantly freezing anything they come into contact with. The three cells are located over Canada, Siberia, and Scotland.
The weather becomes increasingly violent, causing traffic-jammed Manhattan streets to become flooded knee-deep. Jack's son Sam, visiting New York City as he is participating in an academic decathlon, calls his father, promising to be on the next train home, but flooding closes the subways and Grand Central Terminal. As the storm worsens, a massive storm surge generated by the freak superstorm hits Manhattan. Sam and his friends are forced to seek shelter with a large group of people in the New York Public Library, but not before his friend and love interest, Laura, gets injured.
Blake orders the evacuation of the southern states of the United States, causing almost all of the refugees to head to Mexico. Jack and his team set out for Manhattan to find his son. Their truck crashes into another vehicle just past Philadelphia, so the group continues on snowshoes. En route, Frank falls through the glass roof of a snow-covered shopping mall. As Jason and Jack try to pull him up, the glass under them continues cracking and Frank sacrifices himself by cutting the rope. Most of the group taking shelter in the library leaves when the water outside freezes, leaving just Sam and a few others. They burn books to stay alive and break into a vending machine for food. Laura appears to have a cold, so Sam comforts her and confesses his feelings for her, and they kiss. In Mexico, Becker learns that Blake's motorcade was caught in the super storm and is sworn in as the new President.
The next morning, the Sam's group determines that Laura has blood poisoning from the cut on her leg, so Sam and two others search for penicillin in a derelict Russian cargo-ship that drifted inland. The eye of the Canadian super storm passes over New York City and the three barely return to the library with the medicine in time. Jack and an unconscious Jason, who are also in the eye, narrowly escape the super-freeze themselves by taking shelter in an abandoned Wendy's restaurant.
Upon reaching Manhattan, Jack and Jason discover the library buried in snow but find Sam's group alive. New York has become a polar, subarctic city, completely frozen by reaching −98 °F (−72 °C). They radio this to the government-in-exile in Mexico and President Becker orders helicopters flown into New York, finding more survivors. Becker orders search-and-rescue teams to look for other survivors as he gives his first address to the nation. The movie concludes with the astronauts looking down at Earth from the Space Station, showing most of the northern hemisphere covered in ice and snow, with one of the astronauts stating, "Look at that....Have you ever seen the air so clear?"