A businessman in India (Bill Murray) fails to catch his train  called "The Darjeeling Limited"  as it pulls out of a station; he is beaten to it by a younger man, Peter Whitman (Adrien Brody). Peter reunites with brothers Francis (Owen Wilson) and Jack (Jason Schwartzman) on board, the three having not seen each other since their father's funeral a year prior.
Francis has recently survived a near-fatal motorcycle accident (leaving his face and head covered in bandages for the entire film), and thus wishes to reconnect with his brothers on a journey of spiritual self-discovery.
With the help of his assistant, Brendan, Francis draws up a strict itinerary for the trip and takes his brothers' passports to prevent them from getting off the train too early.
Each brother harbors a personal dilemma: Jack is obsessed with his ex-girlfriend and plans to leave the trip to be with her in Italy; Peter's wife Alice (Camilla Rutherford) is seven months pregnant, and he doubts whether or not he will be a good husband; Francis, though earnest about their journey, is secretly searching for their estranged mother (Anjelica Huston), whom the brothers have not seen in many years.
The three also continue to grieve over their father's death; carrying bags and suitcases marked with his initials, along with other personal items that belonged to him.
The train takes the brothers through the countryside and to various Hindu temples, though animosity builds as Jack and Peter become annoyed with Francis' controlling behavior.
During the trip, Jack makes calls to listen to messages left on his ex-girlfriend's answering machine, and he has a fling with the train's stewardess, Rita (Amara Karan). Francis eventually reveals that they will be meeting with their mother, who has become a nun living in a Christian convent in the Himalayas.
Peter and Jack are upset, knowing that they wouldn't have come if Francis had told this earlier.
The tension finally comes to a head and the three fight on the train, disturbing the other passengers.
The Chief Steward (Waris Ahluwalia), whom the brothers have repeatedly annoyed, has them thrown off with all their luggage.
Brendan subsequently quits and returns to the train after giving the boys a letter from their mother; its contents imply that she doesn't want to see them.
The brothers thus decide to leave India, go their separate ways, and never return.
After trekking through the wilderness, the brothers see three young boys fall into a river while attempting to pull a raft across it.
Jack and Francis rescue two of the boys, but Peter fails to save the third, who dies.
They carry the body back to the boys' village, where they spend the night and are warmly treated.
They attend the funeral the next day and experience a flashback: the three brothers (accompanied by Alice) are shown heading to their father's funeral, and then stopping to pick up his Porsche from the repair shop, even though the car is not ready.
It is revealed that their father's death was a result of him being hit by a taxi, and that their mother did not attend the funeral.
Back in the present, the brothers arrive at the airport, but just as they are about to board the plane, the brothers decide to rip up their tickets and go visit their mother regardless.
They then reach the convent, where their mother is surprised but happy to see them (and Francis offhandedly implies that his accident was actually a suicide attempt). That night, after the brothers confront their mother for abandoning them, the family gathers together in silence and reconcile.
The brothers awake the next morning to find their mother gone, leaving them their breakfast.
They decide not to wait for her to return.
On their way to the train station, Jack reads the ending of his newest short story (which mimics the closing lines of Hotel Chevalier) and finally accepts that it is based on his own life; he also states that he will not be going to Italy to meet his ex-girlfriend.
At the station, the three brothers run for another train called "Bengal Lancer" and gleefully discard all their father's suitcases and bags to catch it.
On board, Francis offers to return Peter and Jack their passports, but is told instead to hold onto them.