College student Nick O'Bannon watches a race at McKinley Speedway for a study break with his girlfriend Lori Milligan, and their friends Janet Cunningham and Hunt Wynorski.
While watching the race, Nick has a premonition that a race car crash will send debris into the stands, causing the stadium to collapse, and killing numerous people.
When Nick panics a fight breaks out, and several people leave before Nick's vision becomes a reality including Lori, Janet, Hunt; security guard George Lanter; mechanic Andy Kewzer; mother Samantha Lane; tow truck driver Carter Daniels; and Andy's girlfriend Nadia Monroy.
Nadia gets angry and yells at them when she is suddenly obliterated by a stray tire that flies out of the stadium.
Several days after the disaster Carter is dragged down the street by his tow truck, which explodes.
The next day, Samantha is killed when a flat pebble propelled by a lawn mower is shot through her eye, and Nick and Lori realize that Death is still after them.
Hunt and Janet refuse to believe them, but they convince George to help.
After reviewing the race track's security footage, Nick realizes that Andy is next on Death's list.
The three visit Andy at the mechanic shop to warn him, but he is hit by a jet-propelled propane cylinder and extruded through a grid-linked fence.
Nick receives visions of water and tries to warn Hunt, who is at a country club pool.
A series of accidents cause the pool to start draining, and when Hunt dives in the pool to retrieve his lucky coin he is sucked in by the drain.
At the same time, Janet becomes trapped in a malfunctioning car wash.
Lori and George manage to save Janet before she is shredded by the car washes rotating brush, but Nick is unable to save Hunt whose organs are sucked from his body and shot out through a poolside pump.
George is next, however, multiple failed suicide attempts lead them to believe that saving Janet ruined Death's plan.
Sometime later, after Lori and Janet go to the mall cinema, Nick sees more omens.
He and George rush to the hospital to save Jonathan Groves, another survivor they don't recall at first, who is killed when an overflowing bathtub falls through the ceiling and crushes him.
When they leave, George is struck and killed by a speeding ambulance.
At the movies, Lori starts to see omens as well.
While Nick rushes to save Lori and Janet, a fire erupts behind the movie screen.
Nick convinces Lori to leave, but Janet refuses and is killed by flying debris when the fire sets off an explosion.
As Nick and Lori try to escape, Lori is pulled into a malfunctioning escalator's gears, and Nick realizes that it was just another vision.
Unable to save George, Nick rushes to the theater and barely manages to stop the fire before the explosion occurs.
Weeks later, Nick notices a loose scaffold prop outside of a caf and warns a worker about it before meeting Lori and Janet inside.
While Lori and Janet talk, Nick notices several more omens and realizes that everything they've been through was only a feint meant to lead them to where they needed to be for Death to strike.
At that moment, the scaffold collapses, causing a truck to swerve and crash through the window, killing all three of them.