In Japanese society, it is said a curse is created when a person dies in the grip of a powerful rage or sorrow.
Those who encounter the evil supernatural force are consumed by it, the curse is born repeatedly and spreads.
The original victims of the curse, the Saeki family, haunt their Tokyo suburban house as ghosts and kill anyone who enters.
Housewife Kayako Saeki was murdered by her husband Takeo after he discovered she loved another man, their son Toshio and pet cat Mar also being murdered, before Takeo was hung by Kayakos ghost.
In the first film, American social worker Karen Davis tried to burn the house down to stop the curse, but failed, finding herself hospitalised and haunted by Kayako.
The films chronology is told in a non-linear fashion, taking place in 2004 and 2006 respectively.
Karens younger sister Aubrey is summoned by their bed-ridden mother who informs Aubrey of Karens situation and sends her to Tokyo to retrieve her.
In Japan, Aubrey struggles to communicate with the hospital staff but a journalist named Eason aids her.
Aubrey briefly speaks with Karen, who quickly panics, and has to be restrained.
Karen later escapes her restraints and flees through the hospital stalked by Kayako, until she makes it to the roof which Kayako throws her off in front of Aubrey and Eason.
Eason explains the curse to Aubrey, revealing he rescued Karen from the house fire, and has been investigating the Saeki murders and surrounding events.
The two go to the house to retrieve Kayakos diary, but Toshio drags Aubrey inside to curse her.
Eason takes the diary to an associate, who explains Kayakos mother Mrs.
Kawamata was an itako who exorcised evil spirits from visitors and fed them to her daughter.
Aubrey and Eason plan to visit Mrs.
Kawamata the next day, but at night, Eason develops photographs he took of the Saeki house, but Kayako emerges from a photo and murders him.
Aubrey discovers his body in the morning and travels alone to Mrs.
Kawamatas remote rural home.
Kayakos mother warns her the curse is irreversible, and is suddenly killed by her daughter.
Aubrey ventures to the house, following an image of Karen inside but encounters Takeos ghost who plays out the night he discovered his wifes disloyalty, and snaps Aubreys neck.
Two years later, school girls Allison Flemming, Vanessa, and Miyuki, break into the house on a dare but Allison is locked in the closet and encounters Aubreys ghost but the girls escape.
After Miyuki and Vanessa are consumed by the curse, Allison speaks with school counsellor Ms.
Dale about the curse, but Dale denies its existence, revealing she went to the house and is actually a ghost herself.
Allison is haunted by the ghosts of her friends, and she eventually flees back to Chicago, where she stays with her parents.
Several months on, the Kimbles move into an apartment block in Chicago.
The young son Jake is disturbed by a strange presence in the building brought about by a hooded stranger who covers windows with newspaper.
Jakes father Bill and stepmother Trish are influenced by the curse, Bill accusing his wife of having an affair but she bludgeons him with a frying pan.
Jake and his sister Lacey return from school, but Jake finds his family are all dead.
He runs into the hooded person, revealed to be Allison, who explains the curse followed her.
Kayako appears in Allisons hood, finally taking her, and then emerges to attack Jake.