In Ottumwa, Iowa Walter Day founded Twin Galaxies, an organization formed to keep track of high scores achieved on arcade games.
Billy Mitchell, having achieved the highest ever recorded scores on Donkey Kong and Centipede in the 1980s, remains a video game legend in 2005.
Twin Galaxies has now become a global organization.
Mitchell is portrayed as unabashedly cocky and fond of self-promotion, proclaiming himself the "Sauce King" of Florida for his successful line of homemade hot sauces.
Next to his family, Mitchell considers his arcade scores to be his greatest life achievements.
On the other side of the country, in Redmond, Washington, Boeing engineer Steve Wiebe has been laid off, and now spends his time as a science teacher.
His friends and his wife, Nicole, describe him as an unfortunate figure who always comes up short due to his OCD, despite being proficient at music, sports, art, and mathematics.
He was a star baseball pitcher but was injured and unable to pitch in the state championship.
He is a gifted drummer yet does not care to perform.
Preparing to get back into the workforce, Wiebe begins going to night school to get a master's degree and obtains a Donkey Kong machine to play in his garage as a pastime.
After reading about Mitchell's world record of 874,300 on the internet, Wiebe focuses on mastering Donkey Kong and successfully achieves a score of 1,006,600 points.
Wiebe submits the tape to Twin Galaxies, which propels him to becoming a local celebrity and news topic as the new world record holder for a few weeks.
Mitchell sends his self-styled protege, retired banker turned pro-gamer Brian Kuh, to investigate Wiebe's machine.
Kuh finds that the machine's circuit board was provided by Roy Shildt, a self-styled fitness guru and pickup artist who claims to hold the high score for Missile Command.
Unbeknownst to Wiebe, Shildt and Mitchell have been nemeses for years ever since Mitchell caused Shildt's high score to be brought under scrutiny, preventing him from receiving official recognition from Twin Galaxies.
Since then, Shildt has been looking for a way to exact clandestine revenge on Mitchell.
Based on Wiebe's association with Shildt, the staff of Twin Galaxies suspects that Wiebe's board might have been tampered with and that he may have achieved his score dishonestly.
In order to prove his gaming skills, Wiebe travels to Funspot Arcade in Laconia, New Hampshire, to perform a high score live for Twin Galaxies founder Walter Day and other high-ranking members of Twin Galaxies, hoping to confront Mitchell and play head-to-head.
Although Mitchell does not attend, he sends Kuh to observe Wiebe's play.
Just prior to the kill screen, Kuh is seen gathering a large crowd to witness Wiebe's achievement.
Wiebe reaches the kill screen and also achieves a new world record of 985,600 points.
Mitchell immediately sends a low-quality VHS to Funspot, depicting himself achieving a higher score of 1,047,200 points, a move that proves to be a stark contrast to his and his followers' own opinions throughout the film, in which he repeatedly asserts that live scores are the only credible ones, and is indeed contradictory to the very criteria Twin Galaxies held Wiebe's previous score to.
Despite Wiebe's protests that his own first score was disqualified for being submitted via unsupervised videotape, Twin Galaxies accepts Mitchell's score over Wiebe's and proclaims that Mitchell's new score makes Mitchell the record holder once again.
Nine months later, Wiebe learns that Guinness World Records wants to publish several of Twin Galaxies' records  including Mitchell's latest score.
Wiebe and his family travel to Hollywood, Florida, near Mitchell's home, to challenge him in a public competition, but Mitchell refuses to accept the challenge, and Wiebe fails to surpass a million points.
Nevertheless, Day, on behalf of Twin Galaxies, finally acknowledges Wiebe's integrity and credibility and apologizes for how Wiebe was treated.
In a coda to the film, Wiebe achieves the world record of 1,049,100 in his garage.