An officer in the US Army named Cpt Algren is traumatized by the atrocities he committed during battles against American aborigines, and has turned into an alcoholic. In need of money, he accepts an offer from his former commanding officer Col Bagley to train the newly formed Imperial Japanese Army, which is attempting to suppress the Satsuma Rebellion. The deal is brokered by a Japanese businessman named Omura, and would grant the US exclusive rights to supply arms to Japan. Despite all this, Cpt Algren continues to hate Col Bagley for his role in the former atrocities.
The first battle against the Samurai ends in defeat. The Imperial soldiers, who are poorly trained peasants without knowledge of fire-arms, are easily slaughtered. Cpt Algren kills several Samurai before he is captured, which impresses the enemy leader Katsumoto, who orders that Cpt Algren not be executed. As a result, Cpt Algren is taken to the Samurai village where he is cared for but kept under supervision. With the passing of time, Cpt Algren learns the Japanese language and culture, and develops sympathy for the Samurai, who are angry with the disintegration of traditional feudalism and the spread of modern technology. Cpt Algren also becomes close with Taka, the widow of one of the Samurai he killed. When Omura sends Ninjas to attack the village, Cpt Algren helps defend Katsumoto's family, which earns the Samurai's respect.
Katsumoto is given safe passage to Tokyo to meet with his former student, Emperor Meiji. He brings Cpt Algren along, intending to release him. Cpt Algren notices that the Imperial Army has gotten much better trained and equipped in his absence. Katsumoto, to his dismay, discovers that the Emperor is close with Omura and wishes to distance himself from Katsumoto. As the meeting ends, Katsumoto is arrested by Omura for carrying a sword in public, and asked to commit Seppuku to redeem his honor. After Omura sends men to murder Cpt Algren, Cpt Algren and the Samurai fight back and free Katsumoto, but Katsumoto's son dies in the process to buy time for their escape.
Katsumoto mourns the loss of his son and intends to commit Seppuku anyway, but Cpt Algren convinces him to fight until the end. As the Imperial Army assaults the village, the Samurai use traps and guerilla tactics to wear them down, and both sides proceed to suffer heavy casualties in close quarter melee. After the soldiers temporarily retreat, Katsumoto, knowing that the Samurai cannot win, orders a suicidal last charge on horse-back, during which Cpt Algren kills Col Bagley. As the last Samurai are shot to death by Gatling guns, Katsumoto commits Seppuku with Cpt Algren assisting him. The Imperial Army stops fighting and kneels in respect for the dead and dying warriors.
Days later, as trade negotiations conclude, Cpt Algren, though injured, arrives and interrupts the proceedings. He presents the Emperor with Katsumoto's sword and asks him to remember the traditions for which Katsumoto died. The Emperor realizes that while Japan must increase in foreign interaction, it also should remember its own culture and history. He decides to reject the trade offer and confiscates Omura's property to be given to the poor. Cpt Algren returns to the village to live with Katsumoto's sister.