The plot involves an obsession with the 23 enigma, which is the idea that all incidents and events are directly connected to the number 23, or to some number connected to 23.
Walter Sparrow is an animal control officer married to Agatha; they have a son, Robin.
At a bookstore, Agatha begins looking at a book called "The Number 23" written by Topsy Kretts.
She later gives Walter the book as a birthday present.
Walter starts reading the book, noticing odd similarities between himself and the main character, a detective who refers to himself as "Fingerling". Walter begins to have dreams of murdering Agatha.
Walter tried to warn her about the number being dangerous and how it was going to come after her.
She told him he was crazy.
Walter soon comes to realize that he is Topsy Kretts, having written the book as a way to try and rid himself of the guilt he felt over murdering a woman named Laura Tollins.
He was never caught for the crime, and a man named Kyle Flinch was accused and imprisoned for the murder instead.
Fearing he will hurt his family, he leaves his home and begins living in a hotel.
Agatha finds Walter at the hotel, and tries to assure him that he is no longer the person he was when he wrote the book.
He insists that he is a killer, accepting the fact that he murdered Tollins, and tells Agatha to leave before he kills her too.
Agatha pushes a letter opener into Walter's hand, saying that if he is indeed a killer, he can easily kill again, and dares him to kill her.
She tells him that she loves him.
Walter tells her that she can't love him because no one can, mirroring an accusation made by Laura on the night of her murder.
He leaves the hotel and runs into the street, where he nearly allows himself to be run over by a bus, but steps out of the way at the last minute when he realizes his son is watching.
As he embraces his family, a voice-over by Walter tells the audience that he turned himself in to the police and is awaiting sentencing, having been told that the judge will likely go easy on him since he turned himself in.
A funeral procession takes place in front of Tollins' grave, where it is implied her body has finally been laid to rest, as Flinch observes, finally a free man.