Beck (Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson) is a "retrieval expert", a bounty hunter who collects debts for a man named Billy Walker (William Lucking). He is dispatched to a nightclub to retrieve a championship ring from a football player, and after doing so is assaulted by one of Walker's other collectors.
Angry, he confronts Walker and tells him that he wants out of the business.
Walker talks him into one last bounty - retrieve Walker's son Travis (Seann William Scott) from a small mining town in Brazil and Walker will give him enough money to open his own restaurant.
Beck accepts and leaves for Brazil.
When Beck arrives in the town of El Dorado he meets with the man running the mining operation, Mr.
Hatcher (Christopher Walken). Hatcher gives Beck his blessing to grab Travis, but reneges when he finds out that Travis has discovered a missing golden artifact called "El Gato do Diabo". Beck confronts Hatcher and his men in the local bar and leaves with Travis.
On the way back to the airfield, Travis forces their Jeep off the road and into the jungle.
There he tries to escape but is re-captured by Beck.
After an unfortunate encounter with some local monkeys, the two find themselves in the camp of the local resistance movement.
At the resistance encampment, Travis convinces the rebels that Beck works for Hatcher and was sent to kill them all.
After a prolonged fight, Beck gains the upper hand before the rebel leader Mariana (Rosario Dawson) intervenes.
She wants Travis, as the Gato can be used to ensure the locals can free themselves from Hatcher.
Hatcher suddenly attacks the camp, killing many rebels.
Beck, Travis, and Mariana escape the camp and Beck makes Mariana a deal: she helps him get Travis to the airfield in exchange for the Gato.
After some searching, Travis leads them to a cave behind a waterfall where the Gato is located.
They retrieve it and begin the journey back.
On the way back, Mariana chastises Travis for wanting to sell the artifact, but Travis argues that he actually did want to give it to a museum.
Mariana gives the two men Konlobos, a toxic fruit that paralyzes the eater.
As she tells Beck which direction the airfield is, she leaves them with the fire to keep the animals away.
After waking up able to move, Beck hauls Travis to the airfield.
The local pilot, Declan (Ewen Bremner), tells Beck that Mariana was captured earlier by Hatcher and will probably be killed.
Travis pleads with Beck to help, and the two head into town to rescue her.
Using a cow stampede for cover, the two begin their assault on Hatcher's goons.
Travis becomes trapped by gunfire in a bus, and Beck saves him before the bus explodes.
Hatcher tells his brother to take Mariana and the Gato and flee, but they are stopped by Travis.
Hatcher confronts Beck, who offers him the chance to leave town still.
Hatcher refuses, and is confronted by the townspeople who shoot him before he can leave.
Travis gives the Gato to Mariana before leaving with Beck, who tells him that despite all they've been through he must still return Travis to the U.S. Travis is delivered to his dad who begins to verbally and physically abuse him.
Beck asks to celebrate with them and gives Walker and his men Konlobos.
As they are paralyzed, Beck uncuffs Travis and the duo leave together, with Travis continuing to jokingly annoy Beck.