In Spain 1519, two con artists, Tulio (Kevin Kline) and Miguel (Kenneth Branagh), win a map to the legendary City of Gold, El Dorado, in a rigged gambling match.
<<<<<<< HEAD
After their con is discovered, the two evade capture and hide aboard one of the ships to be led by Hernn Corts (Jim Cummings) to the New World.
During the trip, they are caught as stowaways and imprisoned, but manage to break free and take a rowboat with the help of Corts' horse, Altivo (Frank Welker).
=======
After their con is discovered, the two evade capture and hide aboard one of the ships to be led by Hernán Cortés (Jim Cummings) to the New World.
During the trip, they are caught as stowaways and imprisoned, but manage to break free and take a rowboat with the help of Cortés' horse, Altivo (Frank Welker).
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Later, they land at an unknown shore at the edge of Mexico, and Miguel begins to recognize landmarks from the map, leading them to a totem marker near a large waterfall.
They see a native woman being chased by guards, but when the guards see Tulio and Miguel riding Altivo as depicted on the totem, they treat the two as gods, and along with the woman, escort them under the falls and into El Dorado, a city truly made of gold.
They are brought to the city's elders, kind-hearted Chief Tannabok (Edward James Olmos) and wicked high priest Tzekel-Kan (Armand Assante). Tzekel-Kan, seeking to seize the city from Tannabok, insist the two demonstrate their powers.
Tulio and Miguel bicker between themselves, while a nearby volcano begins to erupt.
When Tulio yells at Miguel to stop pestering him, the volcano suddenly stops erupting, and the citizens take this as proof of their godhood.
Celebrations are held, and the two are showered with gifts of gold, and given luxurious quarters to stay, along with charge of the woman, Chel (Rosie Perez). Chel is aware the two are conning the people but promises to remain quiet if they take her with them when they leave the city.
Tulio convinces Tannabok to built them a vessel that will allow them to leave the city with all the gifts they've been given, which will take a few days.
Chel convinces Miguel to explore the city, which allows her to get romantically closer to Tulio.
Miguel comes to appreciate the peaceful life the citizens seem to enjoy, and joins in with some of their activities.
When Tzekel-Kan sees Miguel playing a ball game with children, he insists that the gods demonstrate their prowess against the city's best players in the same game.
Tulio and Miguel are far outmatched, but Chel is able to substitute the ball with an armadillo named Bibo, allowing them to win; the two spare the ritual of sacrificing the other team, much to the crowd's approval.
During the match, Miguel received a small cut, which Tzekel-Kan sees and realizes the two are not gods.
Tzekel-Kan conjures a giant stone jaguar to chase them through the city.
Tulio and Miguel manage to outwit the stone jaguar, causing both it and Tzekel-Kan to fall into a giant whirlpool, thought to be the entrance to Xibalba, the spirit world.
<<<<<<< HEAD
When Tzekel-Kan comes to, he finds himself facing Corts and his men, and offers to lead them to El Dorado.
With the boat completed, Miguel states his intention to stay in the city.
Tulio and Chel board the boat, loaded with the gifts, when they see smoke on the horizon and realize Corts is close.
Tulio concocts a plan to use the boat to ram rock structures under the waterfall to collapse the main entrance to El Dorado, preventing Corts from finding it, but requires the citizens to pull over a statue in the boat's wake to give it enough speed to ram the rocks.
As the statue starts to fall, Tulio has difficulty in preparing the boat's sails, and Miguel, riding Altivo, jumps onto the boat to unfurl the sails, assuring the boat clears the statue in time.
Tulio's plan works, though the boat and their gifts are lost.
Tulio, Miguel, Chel, and Altivo end up near the totem and hide as Corts' men and Tzekel-Kan arrive.
When Tzekel-Kan finds the entrance blocked, Corts has him taken prisoner as they return to their boats.
=======
When Tzekel-Kan comes to, he finds himself facing Cortés and his men, and offers to lead them to El Dorado.
With the boat completed, Miguel states his intention to stay in the city.
Tulio and Chel board the boat, loaded with the gifts, when they see smoke on the horizon and realize Cortés is close.
Tulio concocts a plan to use the boat to ram rock structures under the waterfall to collapse the main entrance to El Dorado, preventing Cortés from finding it, but requires the citizens to pull over a statue in the boat's wake to give it enough speed to ram the rocks.
As the statue starts to fall, Tulio has difficulty in preparing the boat's sails, and Miguel, riding Altivo, jumps onto the boat to unfurl the sails, assuring the boat clears the statue in time.
Tulio's plan works, though the boat and their gifts are lost.
Tulio, Miguel, Chel, and Altivo end up near the totem and hide as Cortés' men and Tzekel-Kan arrive.
When Tzekel-Kan finds the entrance blocked, Cortés has him taken prisoner as they return to their boats.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Tulio and Miguel, though disappointed they lost their treasure, takes off in a different direction for a new adventure with Chel, unaware that Altivo still wears the golden horseshoes he was outfitted with in the city.