When his rich grandfather, Howard "Red" Stevens (James Garner), dies, Jason (Drew Fuller) thinks he probably isn't going to inherit a piece of the old man's multi-billion-dollar estate. He strongly resents his grandfather because his father had died while working for him. There is an inheritance, in fact, but it comes with a condition: Jason must complete 12 separate assignments within a year in order to get it. Each assignment is centered around a "gift". Gifts of work, money, friends and learning are among the dozen that Jason must perform before he is eligible for the mysterious "Ultimate Gift" his grandfather's will has for him. Throughout his trials and tribulations, the family attorney, Mr. Hamilton (Bill Cobbs), and his secretary Miss Hastings (Lee Meriwether) attempt to guide Jason along the path his grandfather wishes him to travel. But this is a hard task for the guides, because Jason is a spoiled underachiever who has never had to genuinely work. For instance, to carry out the first task he has to fly to Texas, and naturally assumes he has a first-class seat, and is annoyed when he discovers he has a coach class seat, complaining to the steward "Don't you know who I am?"
On his return after completing the first task in Texas, everything he values is suddenly taken away from him – luxury apartment, his restored muscle car, and all his money – and he is left homeless. His trendy girlfriend, Caitlin (Mircea Monroe), ditches him when his credit card is rejected at a fancy restaurant, and she is mortified when he asks her if she could pay the bill. After his mother (Donna Cherry) tells her son she cannot help him as part of the agreement, he miserably wanders the city, for the first time truly alone.
While sleeping in a park that he encounters a woman, Alexia (Ali Hillis), and her outspoken daughter Emily (Abigail Breslin). Jason befriends the two, but then tells them that he needs them to come to the attorney's office and confirm themselves as his "true friends" in order to pass the "gift of friends" assignment. But afterward, Jason walks away and ignores Emily's request to see him again, convincing Alexia and Emily that Jason is too self-centered to be a real friend. However, soon afterward Jason accidentally discovers that Emily is suffering from leukemia, and sees this family as a chance to develop a strong bond with someone. Indeed, the emergence of his "true" self is the key theme of the film.
From that point onwards he tries as best he can to help Emily have a great life while it lasts. Emily also engineers and encourages a romance between Jason and her mother. After Jason has worked through the twelve gifts in twelve months, he finally comes to see his grandfather as more than a dead billionaire who he believes disliked him. One of his tasks requires him to travel to Ecuador and study in a library his grandfather built to help the people there. This also forces him reluctantly to confront his resentment over the death of his father there, and he ends up making a dangerous trip into the mountains with a local guide to see where it happened. Jason tells his guide the story he always believed about his father's death, which is that his plane crashed while he was trying to deliver medical supplies to a neighboring village. The guide, however, reveals that this was a lie fabricated to keep Jason from the truth: his father had been reckless and impulsive, who had stolen and crashed the plane after sneaking away from Red one night. The guide insists this is the lifestyle his grandfather had been trying to save him from. The two then find themselves held hostage by militants for several weeks, until Jason manages to ensure their mutual escape. He returns to America and discovers that Emily's condition has accelerated. As compensation for his lost time, he arranges for one of his initial supervisors, Gus the ranch-hand, to host a belated Christmas celebration at his home for them.
Upon completing his twelve tasks, and enduring this and other "harsh conditions", Jason is given a sum of $100 million to do with whatever he pleases, and all of his property is returned to him. His former girlfriend, knowing that he has regained his wealth, makes an attempt to win him back with the offer of sexual intercourse, but he disgustedly walks out on her.
With his inheritance, Jason chooses to build a hospital, called Emily's Home, for patients with deadly diseases and their families, which also includes a church (knowing that Emily was often in the hospital chapel). Before the building begins, Emily dies. Alexia and Jason pray for her at the chapel. After the groundbreaking for Emily's Home, he is brought back to the law firm for one more meeting. He had exceeded the expectations of his dead grandfather, and receives one final gift of over $2 billion, rewarding Jason not only for his completing the tasks, but for using the $100 million to help others. That night, Jason is seen sitting on a bench in the park, when Alexia joins him. He thanks her for the help that she and her daughter gave him. Then they kiss, as a butterfly, representing Emily, is shown flying around them.