In 1889, the site that would become Perfection Valley is home to the town of Rejection Valley.
The inhabitants are completely dependent on the income from a nearby silver mine, when a hot spring causes Graboid eggs to hatch, resulting in the death of 17 miners.
The mine's owner is Hiram Gummer, great-grandfather of Burt Gummer (Michael Gross). Hiram is a direct opposite of his descendant: he is a cold, lofty, well-mannered businessman with no experience in weapons or in any physical activity whatsoever (except bicycle riding, which quickly proves useless on the harsh terrain). He arrives in town to fix the problem, but finds he is in way over his head dealing with the larvae-like Graboids, which the town has dubbed "Dirt Dragons", when they attack his camp one night.
One of his companions, Juan, kills one with a pick-axe, and the group barely gets away.
Hiram calls for a gunfighter, Black Hand Kelly (Billy Drago). He promises Kelly all the silver he can carry once the mine is reopened, but has to give him his diamond cuff links and double eagle watch fob as a down payment for his services.
While on the lookout for the creatures, they find the severed head of a resident who had not been seen in weeks.
Hiram and Kelly do not get along well, though Kelly succeeds in conveying to Hiram some of his attitude towards firearms and life in general.
Eventually Kelly is eaten alive but not before discovering that four of the creatures have hatched, minus the one that was killed by Juan.
Hiram decides to abandon the town and leave the townsfolk to their fate: however, they force him to give them the silver mine, threatening to alert potential buyers to the danger if he sells it out from under them.
In Carson City, Hiram hears a telegram revealing that the fully-grown Graboids have made it through the pass and are headed for the town.
Changing his mind, he buys weapons and heads back to town to lead a last stand against the creatures.
He apologizes to the townsfolk and says, "A friend once told me it is not important how you spend your money, it's how you spend your life." He then reveals that he sold his gold pocket watch to pay for the weapons.
The town readies itself for a final showdown with the Graboids.
Hiram uses a huge punt gun to blow a hole in one of the Graboids, killing it instantly, but a second one pulls the gun underground.
Tecopa then attracts one of the Graboids by sticking a saw in to the ground and banging on it: when the Graboid rushes to eat him, it impales itself on the saw.
The third and final Graboid grows wiser, however, and avoids all their traps.
Hiram tricks it into coming to the surface and then attaches it by the tail to the wheel of a steam traction engine.
The Graboid is reeled in and slammed against the wheel with such force that it is explosively decapitated on impact.
With the creatures dead, the town decides to keep them secret out of fear that no one would settle in the area if their existence was known, and use the proceeds from the mine to pay for things for the people of the town.
Hiram settles in Rejection (later renamed Perfection), building his home in the same place that his great-grandson Burt Gummer's would one day be.
He is also given a Colt 1865 Gatling gun and begins target practice, enjoying it.
This love for guns would be passed down in his family to Burt.