Hook-handed Vietnam veteran Staff Sergeant John "Four Leaf" Tayback's (Nick Nolte) memoir, Tropic Thunder, is being made into a film.
<<<<<<< HEAD
With the exception of newcomer supporting actor Kevin Sandusky (Jay Baruchel), the castfading action hero Tugg Speedman (Ben Stiller), five-time Academy Award-winning Australian method actor Kirk Lazarus (Robert Downey, Jr.), rapper Alpa Chino (Brandon T. Jackson), and drug-addicted comedian Jeff Portnoy (Jack Black)behave unreasonably.
=======
With the exception of newcomer supporting actor Kevin Sandusky (Jay Baruchel), the cast—fading action hero Tugg Speedman (Ben Stiller), five-time Academy Award-winning Australian method actor Kirk Lazarus (Robert Downey, Jr.), rapper Alpa Chino (Brandon T. Jackson), and drug-addicted comedian Jeff Portnoy (Jack Black)—behave unreasonably.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Rookie director Damien Cockburn (Steve Coogan) cannot control them during filming of a large battle scene, and production is reported to be one month behind schedule a mere week into production.
Studio executive Les Grossman (Tom Cruise) orders Cockburn to resume filming as planned, or risk its cancellation.
Acting on Four Leaf's advice, Cockburn drops the actors into the middle of the jungle, with hidden cameras and rigged special effects explosions to film "guerrilla-style". The actors have guns that fire blanks, along with a map and scene listing that will lead to a helicopter waiting at the end of the route.
Unknown to the actors and production, the group have been dropped in the middle of the Golden Triangle, the home of the heroin-producing Flaming Dragon gang.
Just as the group are about to set off, Cockburn inadvertently steps on an old landmine and is blown up, stunning the actors.
Speedman, believing Cockburn faked his death, persuades the others that Cockburn is alive and that they are still shooting the film.
Lazarus is unconvinced but joins them in their trek through the jungle.
When Four Leaf and pyrotechnics operator Cody Underwood (Danny McBride) try to locate the dead director, they are captured by Flaming Dragon, at which point Four Leaf reveals that he fabricated his memoir, was never in the Army and has hands.
As the actors continue through the jungle, Lazarus and Sandusky discover that Speedman is leading them in the wrong direction.
The four actors, tired of walking and hoping to be rescued, leave Speedman, who goes off by himself and is captured by Flaming Dragon.
Taken to their heroin factory, Speedman believes it is a POW camp from the script.
The gang discovers he is the star of their favorite film, the box office bomb Simple Jack, and forces him to reenact it several times a day.
Meanwhile in Los Angeles, Speedman's agent Rick 'Pecker' Peck (Matthew McConaughey) is trying to negotiate with Grossman an unfulfilled term in Tugg's contract that entitles him to a TiVo.
Flaming Dragon calls the two and demands a ransom for Tugg, but Grossman instead berates the gang.
Despite the threats, Grossman expresses no interest in rescuing Tugg and tries to convince Peck about the benefits of allowing Speedman to die and collecting the insurance.
Grossman also offers Peck a Gulfstream V jet and money in return for his cooperation.
Lazarus, Alpa Chino, Portnoy, and Sandusky discover Flaming Dragon's heroin factory.
After witnessing Speedman being tortured, they plan a rescue attempt based on the film's script.
Lazarus impersonates a farmer towing a captured Portnoy on the back of a water buffalo, distracting the armed guards so Chino and Sandusky can locate the captives.
After the gang's leader (Brandon Soo Hoo) notices inconsistencies in Lazarus' story the actors, knowing their cover has been blown, begin firing, temporarily subduing the gang.
Their control of the gang falls apart when Portnoy grabs the leader and heads for the drugs, and the gang regains their guns and begin firing.
The four actors locate Four Leaf, Underwood and Speedman and cross a bridge rigged to explode to get to Underwood's helicopter.
Speedman asks to remain behind with the gang which he considers his family, but quickly returns when Flaming Dragon fires in pursuit.
Four Leaf detonates the bridge allowing Speedman to reach safety, but as the helicopter takes off, the gang fires a rocket-propelled grenade at the helicopter.
Peck unexpectedly stumbles out of the jungle carrying a TiVo box and throws it in the path of the grenade, saving them.
The crew return to Hollywood, where footage from the hidden cameras is compiled into a feature film, Tropic Blunder, which becomes a major critical and commercial success.
The film wins Speedman his first Academy Award, which Lazarus presents to him at the ceremony.