Van Wilder (Ryan Reynolds) is an extremely popular student at CHC who has been in school for eight years.
For the past Seven semesters he has made some effort to graduate, instead spending his time organizing off-the-hook parties, harassing other students, and posing for figure drawing classes.
However, when Van's father (Tim Matheson) discovers that Van is still in college, he decides to stop paying Van's tuition.
Meanwhile, Gwen Pearson (Tara Reid), a star reporter for the student newspaper, is asked to do an article on Van.
The article proves to be so popular that she is asked to write a follow-up for the front page of the graduation issue.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Although that would be a big win, she is rather put off when Van interprets her attempts to schedule interviews as romantic advanceswhen she already has a boyfriend, Richard "Dick" Bagg (Daniel Cosgrove). Van and Richard dislike each other immediately and perform increasingly disgusting pranks on each other.
=======
Although that would be a big win, she is rather put off when Van interprets her attempts to schedule interviews as romantic advances—when she already has a boyfriend, Richard "Dick" Bagg (Daniel Cosgrove). Van and Richard dislike each other immediately and perform increasingly disgusting pranks on each other.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
In one infamous scene Van and his friends replace the cream inside some pastries with semen from Van's pet bulldog, Colossus, and send them to Richard's fraternity, where the frat brothers do not realize what they are eating until it is too late.
At one point Richard has sex with another woman from a sister sorority, which is the final straw for Gwen later on.
Richard also sets up Van at one of his own parties in which there are some underage drinkers and reports it to the police, which leads to Van almost being expelled.
However, Van proposes an alternative punishment: that the school force him to complete a semester's worth of work in the six days remaining, and then graduate.
The committee agrees to this by a three-to-two decision.
Gwen is impressed that Van is taking the initiative to get his life together.
She then learns of Richard's setting up of Van and his infidelity, and decides to take retribution.
On the morning of Richard's MCAT and interview with Northwestern Medical School, Gwen laces his ritualistic protein shake with a powerful laxative.
Since there are no bathroom breaks allowed during the test, Richard rushes through the 2-hour exam in 20 minutes, "dialing down the middle" (i.e., answering "B" or "C" to every question on the A-through-D multiple-choice test) while disgusting the other test-takers with frequent flatulence.
Afterwards, just as he's about to reach the bathroom, he unexpectedly runs into the medical school interview committee.
They pull him aside into an office to begin the interview and Richard ends up defecating explosively into a trash can while in their presence.
He is briefly seen again in the film, reading Gwen's article in the school paper in the bathroom (his medical school dreams are ruined, as he mentions to Van in a deleted scene). Meanwhile, Van does well on his finals and celebrates his graduation with a party, where his father and Gwen congratulate him.
A subplot depicts the saga of Taj Mahal Badalandabad (Kal Penn), an Indian foreign exchange student who is accepted (out of many "talented" applicants) to be Van's personal assistant.
The main reason for his application for this position, Taj explains, is he wants to have sex with an American girl before he goes home.
He meets a girl named Naomi (Ivana Bozilovic) and Van pushes Taj to go for her, but Taj accidentally sets himself on fire with massage oil.
At the end of the film Taj meets an attractive Indian girl (Teesha Lobo) and it seems like they are going to hit it off.