<<<<<<< HEAD
Raimunda (Penlope Cruz) and Soledad (Lola Dueas) are sisters who grew up in Alcanfor de las Infantas, a small village in La Mancha, but now both live in Madrid.
=======
Raimunda (Penélope Cruz) and Soledad (Lola Dueñas) are sisters who grew up in Alcanfor de las Infantas, a small village in La Mancha, but now both live in Madrid.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
Their parents died in a tragic fire three years prior to the beginning of the film.
Sole returns to the village for the funeral of her elderly and dementia-stricken Aunt Paula (Chus Lampreave). Aunt Paula's neighbour Agustina (Blanca Portillo) confesses to Sole that she has heard Paula talking to the ghost of Sole's mother Irene (Carmen Maura). Sole encounters the ghost herself, and when she returns to Madrid, she discovers that the ghost has stowed away in the trunk of her car.
Irene has brought luggage, intending to stay with her daughter for a while, and Sole, though frightened, agrees to let her mother stay with her: Sole operates a hair salon in her apartment, and Irene will assist her, posing as a Russian woman to hide her true identity.
Sole tries to determine why her mother's ghost has returned to Earth, asking her if she left anything undone in her life.
Irene says that she does have issues to resolve, relating to the questions of why Raimunda hates her and why she is afraid to reveal herself to Raimunda.
Meanwhile Raimunda and her daughter Paula (Yohana Cobo) have a different death to cope with.
Paula's father Paco (Antonio de la Torre) attempts to rape her, claiming that he is not really her father, and Paula stabs him in self-defense.
Raimunda quickly hides the corpse in the deep-freezer of a nearby restaurant with an absent owner.
The restaurant owner, Emilio (Carlos Blanco), is out of town and entrusted Raimunda with the keys so that she can show it to prospective tenants.
When members of a film crew happen upon the restaurant, Raimunda strikes a deal to cater for them, and suddenly finds herself back in the restaurant business.
Raimunda reveals to Paula that Paco was not, in fact, her biological father, and promises to tell her the whole story at a later time.
Agustina is diagnosed with terminal cancer and must go to Madrid for medical treatment.
Raimunda visits her in the hospital.
Agustina asks Raimunda if she has seen her mother's ghost.
Agustina hopes that the ghost will be able to tell her about the fate of her own mother, who disappeared three years ago without a trace.
<<<<<<< HEAD
Raimunda undertakes the task of disposing of Paco's remains: she leaves Paula with Sole, rents a van and transports the freezer to a convenient spot by the river Jcar, 180 kilometres away.
=======
Raimunda undertakes the task of disposing of Paco's remains: she leaves Paula with Sole, rents a van and transports the freezer to a convenient spot by the river Júcar, 180 kilometres away.
>>>>>>> 10700975bfa2773dd7684d375d1ded6f4f1cb0ce
While staying in Sole's apartment, Paula meets her grandmother's ghost and grows close to her.
The next night, Agustina comes to the restaurant to renew her request to Raimunda to ask her mother's ghost about her own mother's whereabouts.
She reveals two startling secrets: that Raimunda's father and Agustina's mother were having an affair and that Agustina's mother disappeared on the same day that Raimunda's parents died.
Sole finally confesses to Raimunda that she has seen their mother's ghost and that the ghost is, in fact, watching television in the next room with Paula.
Irene admits that she did not, in fact, die in the fire, and reveals the whole truth.
We learn that the reason for Raimunda and Irene's estrangement is that Raimunda's father sexually abused her, resulting in the birth of Paula; thus Paula is Raimunda's daughter and also her sister.
Raimunda had been angry with her mother for never noticing and ending this abuse.
Irene tells Raimunda that she had never understood Raimunda's anger and distance until her Aunt Paula told her about what her husband had done to her daughter, and Irene became furious with herself when she found out.
Irene explains that she found her husband in bed with another woman and started the fire that killed them both.
The ashes that had been presumed to be Irene's were, in fact, the ashes of Agustina's mother, the woman with whom Irene's husband was having an affair.
After the fire, Irene wandered for several days in the countryside, until she decided that she wanted to turn herself in.
But first, she wanted to say goodbye to her sister Paula, who had lost the ability to look after herself and with whom Irene had been living prior to setting the fire that killed her husband.
Paula, who was living in the past due to her senility, welcomed Irene home as if nothing had happened, and Irene stayed, caring for her sister and expecting that the police would come soon to arrest her.
Due to the superstitious and closed nature of the community, however, the police never came and the residents, who are accustomed to tales of the dead returning, explained the rare sightings of Irene as "un fantasma", a ghost.
The family reunites at Aunt Paula's house.
Irene reveals her presence to Agustina, who believes her to be a ghost.
Irene pledges to stay in the village and care for Agustina as her cancer worsens, saying to Raimunda that it was the least that she could do after killing Agustina's mother.
In the last scene Raimunda visits her mother at Agustina's house.
The two embrace and tell one another that they now have time to repair their relationship.