Doug Madsen (Tim Allen), Woody Stevens (John Travolta), Bobby Davis (Martin Lawrence), and Dudley Frank (William H. Macy) are four middle-aged suburban men living in a Cincinnati area suburb who find themselves frustrated with the pace of daily life and lack of adventure.
Doug is a dentist who has trouble relating to his son Billy (Dominic Janes), Dudley is a single clumsy computer programmer who is afraid to talk to women.
Bobby is a henpecked plumber whose wife has made him return to work after having taken a year off to unsuccessfully write a book, and Woody is a rich lawyer married to a supermodel.
They find escape from their daily routines on weekends by riding motorcycles together posing as a biker gang called the "Wild Hogs".
One day, when Woody finds out his wife is divorcing him and leaving him bankrupt, he and his friends go on a road trip on their bikes to California.
After encountering several misadventures, they end up at a local bar, where they meet the Del Fuego gang, headed by Jack (Ray Liotta). Jack calls the Wild Hogs "posers" and has his gang take Dudley's bike, forcing the men to leave with Dudley in a sidecar attached to Woody's bike.
Outraged at their actions, Woody retrieves Dudley's bike, cutting off their fuel supplies in the process and he fabricates a story.
When the Del Fuegos hear the Wild Hogs riding back past the bar, they try to pursue them, only for the bikes to stall.
Jack inadvertently drops his lit cigarette onto the ground, causing the bar to explode.
Eventually, the Wild Hogs run out of gas and end up in Madrid, New Mexico, where they stumble into a diner and help themselves to water and beer without first paying for the beer.
As a result, the townspeople first mistake them for the Del Fuego gang.
When the Wild Hogs explain their actions, they learn that the Del Fuegos have been terrorizing the town frequently, while the local police force are unable to do anything to protect the town.
Although Woody is still antsy about the Del Fuegos, the others convince him to stay in the town overnight.
During their stay in the town, Dudley falls in love with Maggie (Marisa Tomei), the diner's owner, while two Del Fuegos spot the group and report their location to Jack.
Jack tells his scouts not to hurt the Wild Hogs until he gets there.
The Wild Hogs fight the scouts and get the scouts to leave and are hailed as heroes.
The next day, Woody persuades the others to leave, but then the Del Fuego gang arrives.
Jack threatens to attack on the town unless the Wild Hogs pay for the damage to the bar.
Woody reveals what he really did to get Dudley's bike back as well as the real reason for the trip.
Jack takes over Maggie's diner, but when he threatens to burn it, Dudley confronts them and is captured.
The others join Dudley but are repeatedly beaten down.
The townspeople band together to battle the Del Fuegos, but just then Damien Blade (Peter Fonda), Jack's father and the founder of the Del Fuegos, arrives and stops the fight.
Blade lectures Jack for letting four "posers" hold off an entire biker gang, questioning aloud just which side was the "posers," and saying that the bar was merely an insurance scam and therefore he was glad that the Wild Hogs destroyed it.
Blade tells the Del Fuegos to leave town, and ride the open road until they remember what riding is really about, mentioning as he leaves that Jack "takes after his mother."
Doug and Bobby's wives arrive, and Doug reconciles with his son.
Bobby's wife orders him to return with her, but he refuses and allows her to let him finish the ride.
The Wild Hogs leave and arrive in California, and calls Extreme Makeover: Home Edition to give the Del Fuegos a new bar.