Twenty years ago, Professor Charles Xavier and Erik Lehnsherr meet young Jean Grey at her parents' house to invite her to join their school.
Ten years later, the industrialist father of Warren Worthington III discovers his son is a mutant as Warren tries to cut off his wings.
In the present, Worthington Labs announces it has developed an inoculation to suppress the X-gene that gives mutants their abilities, and offer the "cure" to any mutant who wants it.
The "cure" is created from the genome of a young mutant named Jimmy, who lives at the Worthington facility on Alcatraz Island.
While some mutants are interested in the "cure", including the X-Men's Rogue, many others are horrified by the announcement and are offended by the very idea of "curing" mutation.
In response to the news, Lehnsherr, now known as Magneto, reestablishes his Brotherhood of Mutants with mutants who oppose the "cure", warning his followers that the "cure" will be forcefully used to exterminate the mutant race.
With help from Pyro, Magneto recruits Callisto, as well as several other mutants.
They attack the mobile prison holding Mystique to free her, also freeing Juggernaut and Multiple Man.
Mystique saves Magneto, taking a shot from a round containing the mutant "cure", rendering her human.
Hateful of humans, Magneto abandons Mystique, much to her shock.
Meanwhile, Cyclops, still distraught over the loss of his fiance Jean Grey, drives to her resting location at Alkali Lake.
Jean appears to Cyclops but, as the two kiss, Jean starts to disintegrate him.
Sensing trouble, Xavier sends Wolverine and Storm to investigate.
When they arrive, they find only telekinetically floating rocks, Cyclops' glasses, and an unconscious Jean.
When they return to the X-Mansion, Xavier explains to Wolverine that when Jean sacrificed herself, she also freed the "Phoenix", a powerful and animalistic alternate personality which Xavier had telepathically repressed, fearing the Phoenix's destructive potential.
Wolverine is disgusted to learn of this psychic tampering with Jean's mind but, once she awakens, he discovers that she killed Cyclops and is not the Jean Grey he once knew.
The Phoenix emerges, knocks out Wolverine, and escapes to her childhood home.
Magneto learns of Jean's resurrection through Callisto, and the X-Men arrive at the Grey home at the same time as the Brotherhood.
Magneto and Xavier go in alone, and both attempt to vie for Jean's loyalty until the Phoenix resurfaces.
She destroys the house and disintegrates Xavier before leaving the property with Magneto.
The Brotherhood decides to strike Worthington Labs, and the government sends multiple teams to attack the Brotherhood's base in the forest, with information gained from Mystique, furious over Magneto's betrayal.
However, the life forms in the camp are all copies of Multiple Man, and Magneto uses his powers to move the Golden Gate Bridge so he can connect Alcatraz to the San Francisco mainland and carry his army on it, facilitating the attack.
The remaining X-Men confront the Brotherhood, despite being significantly outnumbered, and arrive just as the military troops, who thus far had been neutralizing the attacking mutants, are overwhelmed by the Brotherhood.
During the fight, Kitty saves Jimmy from the Juggernaut, who had been sent to kill him.
Wolverine has Colossus throw him at Magneto, distracting him and allowing Beast to inject Magneto with the "cure", nullifying his powers.
Just as Wolverine is attempting to calm down Jean, Army reinforcements arrive and shoot at her, awakening the Phoenix, who disintegrates the troops in retaliation.
As the Phoenix begins to destroy Alcatraz and anyone within range of her powers, Wolverine realizes that, due to his healing factor, only he can stop the Phoenix.
Wolverine approaches her, and Jean momentarily gains control, begging him to kill her.
Wolverine fatally stabs Jean, destroying the Phoenix, but mourns her death.
Sometime later, mutant rights are finally obtained, and Xavier's school is still operating with Storm as headmistress, and the President of the United States appoints Beast as ambassador to the United Nations.
Rogue reveals to Bobby Drake that she has taken the cure, and he is upset by her decision.
Meanwhile, Magneto sits alone at a chessboard in a San Francisco park.
As he gestures toward a metal chess piece, it twitches slightly toward him.
Implying that his magnetic powers have returned.
In a post-credits scene, Dr.
Moira MacTaggert checks on a comatose patient who greets her with Xavier's voice, leaving her startled.