Five thousand years ago, a brave Pharaoh who killed and imprisoned Anubis, the Egyptian lord of the dead, after he tried to destroy the world by persuading the kings to play the mysterious Shadow Games.
In the present day, Anubis' tomb is uncovered by archaeologists, amazed with his most valuable treasure, the Pyramid of Light.
A devastating spiritual force unleashes from the relic and liberates the Egyptian god.
Anubis, now free, is willing to conclude his plan.
Moving ahead to the present, the Battle City Finals have recently concluded, and Yugi Muto has achieved international fame by defeating his arch-rival Seto Kaiba and obtaining the three powerful Egyptian God Cards: Slifer the Sky Dragon, Obelisk the Tormentor, and the Winged Dragon of Ra.
Kaiba, determined to defeat Yugi, turns to Pegasus, the now retired creator of Duel Monsters, in order to obtain any new cards designed to defeat the Egyptian Gods.
Pegasus tells Kaiba that he has the card he is looking for, but will only give it to Kaiba if he can beat him in a duel.
Then the two duel with Kaiba winning the duel and taking two cards, although Pegasus claims he only created one.
Elsewhere, Yugi and Ta go to the local museum where Anubis' corpse and the Pyramid of Light are on display, meeting up with Yugi's grandpa, who reads a prophecy describing a clairvoyant eye which will prevent the world's destruction if blinded.
Anubis' spirit attacks the group with Yugi having a vision of Anubis himself manipulating Kaiba and him in a Shadow Game.
He awakens to find Anubis and the Pyramid of Light missing.
Kaiba's brother Mokuba arrives, and Yugi is taken to Kaiba's duel dome with his friends Joey and Tristan in pursuit.
Kaiba arrogantly and ignorantly forces Yami Yugi into a duel, unaware that Anubis is manipulating him into using one of the two new cards, Pyramid of Light, which covers the field in a huge replica of the actual pyramid and destroys the Egyptian Gods.
Yugi, Joey and Tristan are sucked into the pyramid while Mokuba flees the crumbling building.
Yugi, Joey, and Tristan awaken within the Millennium Puzzle, finding Anubis' tomb within.
Anubis reveals that his monsters will destroy the modern world.
Yami Yugi and Kaiba continue their duel, each blow to their in-game Life Points actually draining away their physical energy.
To make matters worse, Kaiba manages to eliminate half of Yami Yugi's deck through Deck Destruction Virus, leaving him with barely any cards.
Kaiba uses the second new card, Blue-Eyes Shining Dragon, to destroy Yami's last monster and dropping his Life Points to 200.
Ta, Solomon, and Mokuba escape the collapsing dome in Pegasus' helicopter, Pegasus having figured out what is going on.
Ta's soul is sent into the Millennium Puzzle to aid Yugi, Joey and Tristan.
Yugi finds the Dagger of Fate within Anubis' tomb, and uses it to destroy the all-seeing eye in the tomb as predicted by the prophecy.
Anubis materializes behind Kaiba as he tries to alter the duel's path, casting him aside and taking command of the duel.
Yami, reunited with Yugi, destroys the Pyramid of Light card with Blue-Eyes Shining Dragon and then uses Kaiba's planned strategy to summon the Egyptian Gods and end the duel by destroying Anubis.
However, Anubis revealed his true form, The End of Anubis.
This proves to be his undoing when Yugi and Yami summon Blue-Eyes Shining Dragon to seal Anubis.
Kaiba departs promising to defeat Yugi, and Yugi thanking Yami and his friends for their companionship.